The Privilege of Reminiscence, however rambling or tiresome, is one generally allow’dto the very aged; indeed, ’tis frequently by means of such Recollections that the obscureoccurrences of History, and the lesser Anecdotes of the Great, are transmitted to Posterity.
Tho’ many of my readers have at times observ’d and remark’da Sort of antique Flow in my Stile of Writing, it hath pleased me to pass amongst the Membersof this Generation as a young Man, giving out the Fiction that I was born in 1890, in America.I am now, however, resolv’d to unburthen myself of a Secret which I have hitherto keptthro’ Dread of Incredulity; and to impart to the Publick a true knowledge of my long years,in order to gratifie their taste for authentick Information of an Age with whose famous PersonagesI was on familiar Terms. Be it then known that I was born on the family Estate in Devonshire,of the 10th day of August, 1690 (or in the new Gregorian Stile of Reckoning, the 20thof August), being therefore now in my 228th year. Coming early to London, I sawas a Child many of the celebrated Men of King William’s Reign, including the lamentedMr. Dryden, who sat much at the Tables of Will’s Coffee-House. With Mr.Addison and Dr. Swift I later became very well acquainted, and was an even morefamiliar Friend to Mr. Pope, whom I knew and respected till the Day of his Death. Butsince it is of my more recent Associate, the late Dr. Johnson, that I am at this timedesir’d to write; I will pass over my Youth for the present.
I had first Knowledge of the Doctor in May of the year 1738, tho’ I didnot at that Time meet him. Mr. Pope had just compleated his Epilogue to his Satires(the Piece beginning: “Not twice a Twelvemonth you appear in Print.”), and had arrang’dfor its Publication. On the very Day it appear’d, there was also publish’d a Satirein Imitation of Juvenal, intitul’d “London”, by the then unknownJohnson; and this so struck the Town, that many Gentlemen of Taste declared, it was theWork of a greater Poet than Mr. Pope. Notwithstanding what some Detractors have saidof Mr. Pope’s petty Jealousy, he gave the Verses of his new Rival no small Praise;and having learnt thro’ Mr. Richardson who the Poet was, told me ‘that Mr.Johnson wou’d soon be deterré.’
I had no personal Acquaintance with the Doctor till 1763, when I was presentedto him at the Mitre Tavern by Mr. James Boswell, a young Scotchman of excellentFamily and great Learning, but small Wit, whose metrical Effusions I had sometimes revis’d.
Dr. Johnson, as I beheld him, was a full, pursy Man, very ill drest,and of slovenly Aspect. I recall him to have worn a bushy Bob-Wig, untyed and without Powder,and much too small for his Head. His cloaths were of rusty brown, much wrinkled, and with morethan one Button missing. His Face, too full to be handsom, was likewise marred by the Effectsof some scrofulous Disorder; and his Head was continually rolling about in a sort of convulsiveway. Of this Infirmity, indeed, I had known before; having heard of it from Mr. Pope,who took the Trouble to make particular Inquiries.
Being nearly seventy-three, full nineteen Years older than Dr. Johnson(I say Doctor, tho’ his Degree came not till two Years afterward), I naturally expectedhim to have some Regard for my Age; and was therefore not in that Fear of him, which othersconfess’d. On my asking him what he thought of my favourable Notice of his Dictionaryin The Londoner, my periodical Paper, he said: “Sir, I possess no Recollectionof having perus’d your Paper, and have not a great Interest in the Opinions of the lessthoughtful Part of Mankind.” Being more than a little piqued at the Incivility of onewhose Celebrity made me solicitous of his Approbation, I ventur’d to retaliate in kind,and told him, I was surpris’d that a Man of Sense shou’d judge the Thoughtfulnessof one whose Productions he admitted never having read. “Why, Sir,” reply’dJohnson, “I do not require to become familiar with a Man’s Writings in orderto estimate the Superficiality of his Attainments, when he plainly shews it by his Eagernessto mention his own Productions in the first Question he puts to me.” Having thus becomeFriends, we convers’d on many Matters. When, to agree with him, I said I was distrustfulof the Authenticity of Ossian’s Poems, Mr. Johnson said: “That, Sir,does not do your Understanding particular Credit; for what all the Town is sensible of, is nogreat Discovery for a Grub-Street Critick to make. You might as well say, you have astrong Suspicion that Milton wrote Paradise Lost!”
I thereafter saw Johnson very frequently, most often at Meetings ofTHE LITERARY CLUB, which was founded the next Year by the Doctor, together with Mr. Burke,the parliamentary Orator, Mr. Beauclerk, a Gentleman of Fashion, Mr. Langton,a pious Man and Captain of Militia, Sir J. Reynolds, the widely known Painter, Dr. Goldsmith, the prose and poetick Writer, Dr. Nugent, father-in-law to Mr. Burke,Sir John Hawkins, Mr. Anthony Chamier, and my self. We assembled generally atseven o’clock of an Evening, once a Week, at the Turk’s-Head, in Gerrard-Street,Soho, till that Tavern was sold and made into a private Dwelling; after which Event we mov’dour Gatherings successively to Prince’s in Sackville-Street, Le Tellier’sin Dover-Street, and Parsloe’s and The Thatched House in St. James’s-Street.In these Meetings we preserv’d a remarkable Degree of Amity and Tranquillity, which contrastsvery favourably with some of the Dissensions and Disruptions I observe in the literary and amateurPress Associations of today. This Tranquillity was the more remarkable, because we had amongstus Gentlemen of very opposed Opinions. Dr. Johnson and I, as well as many others, werehigh Tories; whilst Mr. Burke was a Whig, and against the American War,many of his Speeches on that Subject having been widely publish’d. The least congenialMember was one of the Founders, Sir John Hawkins, who hath since written many misrepresentationsof our Society. Sir John, an eccentrick Fellow, once declin’d to pay his part ofthe Reckoning for Supper, because ’twas his Custom at Home to eat no Supper. Later heinsulted Mr. Burke in so intolerable a Manner, that we all took Pains to shew our Disapproval;after which Incident he came no more to our Meetings. However, he never openly fell out withthe Doctor, and was the Executor of his Will; tho’ Mr. Boswell and others haveReason to question the genuineness of his Attachment. Other and later Members of the CLUB wereMr. David Garrick, the Actor and early Friend of Dr. Johnson, Messieurs Tho.and Jos. Warton, Dr. Adam Smith, Dr. Percy, Author of the “Reliques”,Mr. Edw. Gibbon, the Historian, Dr. Burney, the Musician, Mr. Malone, theCritick, and Mr. Boswell. Mr. Garrick obtain’d Admittance only with Difficulty;for the Doctor, notwithstanding his great Friendship, was for ever affecting to decry the Stageand all Things connected with it. Johnson, indeed, had a most singular Habit of speakingfor Davy when others were against him, and of arguing against him, when others were forhim. I have no Doubt but that he sincerely lov’d Mr. Garrick, for he never alludedto him as he did to Foote, who was a very coarse Fellow despite his comick Genius. Mr.Gibbon was none too well lik’d, for he had an odious sneering Way which offendedeven those of us who most admir’d his historical Productions. Mr. Goldsmith, alittle Man very vain of his Dress and very deficient in Brilliancy of Conversation, was my particularFavourite; since I was equally unable to shine in the Discourse. He was vastly jealous of Dr.Johnson, tho’ none the less liking and respecting him. I remember that once a Foreigner,a German, I think, was in our Company; and that whilst Goldsmith was speaking,he observ’d the Doctor preparing to utter something. Unconsciously looking upon Goldsmithas a meer Encumbrance when compar’d to the greater Man, the Foreigner bluntly interruptedhim and incurr’d his lasting Hostility by crying, “Hush, Toctor Shonson issgoing to speak!”
In this luminous Company I was tolerated more because of my Years than formy Wit or Learning; being no Match at all for the rest. My Friendship for the celebrated MonsieurVoltaire was ever a Cause of Annoyance to the Doctor; who was deeply orthodox, and whous’d to say of the French Philosopher: “Vir est acerrimi Ingenii et paucarumLiterarum.”
Mr. Boswell, a little teazing Fellow whom I had known for some Timepreviously, us’d to make Sport of my aukward Manners and old-fashion’d Wig and Cloaths.Once coming in a little the worse for Wine (to which he was addicted) he endeavour’d tolampoon me by means of an Impromptu in verse, writ on the Surface of the Table; but lackingthe Aid he usually had in his Composition, he made a bad grammatical Blunder. I told him, heshou’d not try to pasquinade the Source of his Poesy. At another Time Bozzy (aswe us’d to call him) complain’d of my Harshness toward new Writers in the ArticlesI prepar’d for The Monthly Review. He said, I push’d every Aspirant off theSlopes of Parnassus. “Sir,” I reply’d, “you are mistaken. They who losetheir Hold do so from their own Want of Strength; but desiring to conceal their Weakness, theyattribute the Absence of Success to the first Critick that mentions them.” I am glad torecall that Dr. Johnson upheld me in this Matter.
Dr. Johnson was second to no Man in the Pains he took to revise the bad Verses of others;indeed, ’tis said that in the book of poor blind old Mrs. Williams, there are scarce twolines which are not the Doctor’s. At one Time Johnson recited to me some linesby a Servant to the Duke of Leeds, which had so amus’d him, that he hadgot them by Heart. They are on the Duke’s Wedding, and so much resemble in Quality theWork of other and more recent poetick Dunces, that I cannot forbear copying them:
“When the Duke of Leeds shall marry’d be
To a fine young Lady of high Quality
How happy will that Gentlewoman be
In his Grace of Leeds’ good Company.”
I ask’d the Doctor, if he had ever try’d making Sense of this Piece; and upon hissaying he had not, I amus’d myself with the following Amendment of it:
When Gallant LEEDS auspiciously shall wed
The virtuous Fair, of antient Lineage bred,
How must the Maid rejoice with conscious Pride
To win so great an Husband to her Side!On shewing this to Dr. Johnson, he said, “Sir, you have straightened out the Feet,but you have put neither Wit nor Poetry into the Lines.”
It wou’d afford me Gratification to tell more of my Experiences withDr. Johnson and his circle of Wits; but I am an old Man, and easily fatigued. I seemto ramble along without much Logick or Continuity when I endeavour to recall the Past; and fearI light upon but few Incidents which others have not before discuss’d. Shou’d mypresent Recollections meet with Favour, I might later set down some further Anecdotes of oldTimes of which I am the only Survivor. I recall many things of Sam Johnson and his Club,having kept up my Membership in the Latter long after the Doctor’s Death, at which I sincerelymourn’d. I remember how John Burgoyne, Esq., the General, whose Dramatick and PoeticalWorks were printed after his Death, was blackballed by three Votes; probably because of hisunfortunate Defeat in the American War, at Saratoga. Poor John!His Son fared better, I think, and was made a Baronet. But I am very tired. I am old, very old,and it is Time for my Afternoon Nap.
