“Hello, Bruce. Haven’t seen you in a dog’s age. Come in.”
I threw open the door, and he followed me into the room. His gaunt, ungainlyfigure sprawled awkwardly into the chair I indicated, and he twirled his hat between nervousfingers. His deepset eyes wore a worried, hunted look, and he glanced furtively around the roomas if searching for a hidden something which might unexpectedly pounce upon him. His face washaggard and colorless. The corners of his mouth twitched spasmodically.
“What’s the matter, old man? You look as if you’d seen a ghost.Brace up!” I crossed to the buffet, and poured a small glass of wine from the decanter.“Drink this!”
He downed it with a hasty gulp, and took to toying with his hat again.
“Thanks, Prague—I don’t feel quite myself tonight.”
“You don’t look it, either! What’s wrong?”
Malcolm Bruce shifted uneasily in his chair.
I eyed him in silence for a moment, wondering what could possibly affect theman so strongly. I knew Bruce as a man of steady nerves and iron will. To find him so visiblyupset was, in itself, unusual. I passed cigars, and he selected one, automatically.
It was not until the second cigar had been lighted that Bruce broke the silence.His nervousness was apparently gone. Once more he was the dominant, self-reliant figure I knewof old.
“Prague,” he began, “I’ve just been through the most devilish,gruesome experience that ever befell a man. I don’t know whether I dare tell it or not,for fear you’ll think I’ve gone crazy—and I wouldn’t blame you if you did!But it’s true, every word of it!”
He paused, dramatically, and blew a few rings of smoke in the air.
I smiled. Many a weird tale I had listened to over that self-same table. Theremust have been some kink in my personality that inspired confidence, for I had been told storiesthat some men would have given years of their life to have heard. And yet, despite my love ofthe bizarre and the dangerous, and my longing to explore far reaches of little-known lands,I had been doomed to a life of prosaic, flat, uneventful business.
“Do you happen to have heard of Professor Van Allister?” asked Bruce.
“You don’t mean Arthur Van Allister?”
“The same! Then you know him?”
“I should say so! Known him for years. Ever since he resigned as Professorof Chemistry at the College so he could have more time for his experiments. Why, I even helpedhim choose the plans for that sound-proof laboratory of his, on the top floor of his home. Thenhe got so busy with his confounded experiments he couldn’t find time to be chummy!”
“You may recall, Prague, that when we were in college together, I usedto dabble quite a bit in chemistry?”
I nodded, and Bruce continued:
“About four months ago I found myself out of a job. Van Allister advertisedfor an assistant, and I answered. He remembered me from college days, and I managed to convincehim I knew enough about chemistry to warrant a trial.
“He had a young lady doing his secretarial work—a Miss Marjorie Purdy.She was one of these strict-attention-to-business types, and as good-looking as she was efficient.She had been helping Van Allister a bit in his laboratory, and I soon discovered she took agenuine interest in puttering around, making experiments of her own. Indeed, she spent nearlyall her spare time with us in the laboratory.
“It was only natural that such companionship should result in a closefriendship, and it wasn’t long before I began to depend on her to help me in difficultexperiments when the Professor was busy. I never could seem to stump her. That girl took tochemistry as a duck takes to water!
“About two months ago Van Allister had the laboratory partitioned off,and made a separate workroom for himself. He told us that he was about to enter upon a seriesof experiments which, if successful, would bring him everlasting fame. He flatly refused tomake us his confidants in any way, shape, or manner.
“From that time on, Miss Purdy and I were left alone more and more. Fordays at a time the Professor would retire to the seclusion of his new workshop, sometimes noteven appearing for his meals.
“That meant, too, that we had more spare time on our hands. Our friendshipripened. I felt a growing admiration for the trim young woman who seemed perfectly content tofuss around smelly bottles and sticky messes, gowned in white from head to foot, even to the rubber glovesshe wore.
“Day before yesterday Van Allister invited us into his workshop.
“‘At last I have achieved success,’ he announced, holding upfor our inspection a small bottle containing a colorless liquid. ‘I have here what willrank as the greatest chemical discovery ever known. I am going to prove its efficacy right beforeyour eyes. Bruce, will you bring me one of the rabbits, please?’
“I went back into the other room and brought him one of the rabbits wekept, together with guinea pigs, for experimental purposes.
“He put the little animal into a small glass box just large enough tohold it, and closed the cover. Then he set a glass funnel in a hole in the top of the box, andwe drew nearer to watch the experiment.
“He uncorked the bottle, and poised it above the rabbit’s prison.
“‘Now to prove whether my weeks of effort have resulted in successor failure!’
“Slowly, methodically, he emptied the contents of the bottle into thefunnel, and we watched it trickle into the compartment with the frightened animal.
“Miss Purdy uttered a suppressed cry, and I rubbed my eyes to make surethat they had not deceived me. For, in the case where but a moment before there had been a live,terrified rabbit, there was now nothing but a pile of soft, white ashes!
“Professor Van Allister turned to us with an air of supreme satisfaction.His face radiated ghoulish glee and his eyes were alight with a weird, insane gleam. When hespoke, his voice took on a tone of mastery.
“‘Bruce—and you, too, Miss Purdy—it has been your privilegeto witness the first successful trial of a preparation that will revolutionize the world. Itwill instantaneously reduce to a fine ash anything with which it comes into contact, exceptglass! Just think what that means. An army equipped with glass bombs filled with my compoundcould annihilate the world! Wood, metal, stone, brick—everything—swept awaybefore them; leaving no more trace than the rabbit I have just experimented upon—just apile of soft, white ashes!’
“I glanced at Miss Purdy. Her face had gone as white as the apron shewore.
“We watched Van Allister as he transferred all that was left of the bunnyto a small bottle, and neatly labeled it. I’ll admit that I was suffering a mental chillmyself by the time he dismissed me, and we left him alone behind the tightly closed doors ofhis workshop.
“Once safely outside, Miss Purdy’s nerves gave way completely. Shereeled, and would have fallen had I not caught her in my arms.
“The feel of her soft, yielding body held close to my own was the laststraw. I cast prudence to the winds and crushed her tightly to my breast. Kiss after kiss Ipressed upon her full red lips, until her eyes opened and I saw the lovelight reflected in them.
“After a delicious eternity we came back to earth again—long enoughto realize that the laboratory was no place for such ardent demonstrations. At any moment VanAllister might come out of his retreat, and if he should discover our love-making—in hispresent state of mind—we dared not think of what might happen.
“For the rest of the day I was like a man in a dream. It’s a wonderto me that I succeeded in accomplishing anything at all. My body was merely an automaton, awell-trained machine, going about its appointed tasks, while my mind soared into far-away realmsof delightful day-dreaming.
“Marjorie kept busy with her secretarial work for the rest of the day,and not once did I lay eyes upon her until my tasks in the laboratory were completed.
“That night we gave over to the joys of our new-found happiness. Prague,I shall remember that night as long as I live! The happiest moment I have ever known was whenMarjorie Purdy promised to become my wife.
“Yesterday was another day of unalloyed bliss. All day long my sweetheartand I worked side by side. Then followed another night of love-making. If you’ve neverbeen in love with the only girl in the world, Prague, you can’t understand the deliriousjoy that comes from the very thought of her! And Marjorie returned my devotion a hundred-fold.She gave herself unreservedly into my keeping.
“Along about noontime, today, I needed something to complete an experiment,and I stepped over to the drug store for it.
“When I returned I missed Marjorie. I looked for her hat and coat, andthey were gone. The Professor had not shown himself since the experiment upon the rabbit, andwas locked in his workshop.
“I asked the servants, but none of them had seen her leave the house,nor had she left any message for me.
“As the afternoon wore on I grew frantic. Evening came, and still no signof my dear little girl.
“All thought of work was forgotten. I paced the floor of my room likea caged lion. Every jangle of the ’phone or ring at the door bolstered up my falteringhopes of some word from her, but each time I was doomed to disappointment. Each minute seemedan hour, each hour an eternity!
“Good God, Prague! You can’t imagine how I suffered! From the heightsof sublime love I mentally plunged to the darkest depths of despair. I conjured visions of allsorts of terrible fates overtaking her. Still, not a word did I hear.
“It seemed to me that I had lived a lifetime, but my watch told me itwas only half-past seven when the butler told me that Van Allister wanted me in the laboratory.
“I was in no mood for experiments, but while I was under his roof he wasmy master, and it was for me to obey.
“The Professor was in his workshop, the door slightly ajar. He calledto me to close the door of the laboratory and join him in the little room.
“In my present state of mind my brain photographed every minute detailof the scene which met my eyes. In the center of the room, on a marble-top table, was a glasscase about the shape and size of a coffin. It was filled almost to the brim with that same colorlessliquid which the small bottle had contained, two days before.
“At the left, on a glass-top tabourette, was a newly labeled glass jar.I could not repress an involuntary shudder as I realized that it was filled with soft, whiteashes. Then I saw something that almost made my heart stop beating!
“On a chair, in a far corner of the workshop, was the hat and coat ofthe girl who had pledged her life to mine—the girl whom I had vowed to cherish and protectwhile life should last!
“My senses were numbed, my soul surcharged with horror, as realizationflashed over me. There could be but one explanation. The ashes in that jar were the ashesof Marjorie Purdy!
“The world stood still for one long, terrible moment, and then I wentmad—stark, staring mad!
“The next I can remember, the Professor and I were locked in a desperatestruggle. Old as he was, he still possessed a strength nearly equal to mine and he had the addedadvantage of calm self-possession.
“Closer and closer he forced me to the glass coffin. A few moments moreand my ashes would join those of the girl I had loved. I stumbled against the tabourette, andmy fingers closed over the jar of ashes. With one, last, superhuman effort, I raised it highabove my head, and brought it down with crushing force upon the skull of my antagonist! Hisarm relaxed, his limp form dropped in a senseless heap to the floor.
“Still acting upon impulse, I raised the silent form of the Professorand carefully, lest I should spill some of it on the floor, lowered the body into the casketof death!
“A moment, and it was over. Professor and liquid, both, were gone, andin their place was a little pile of soft, white ashes!
“As I gazed at my handiwork the brainstorm passed away, and I came faceto face with the cold, hard truth that I had killed a fellow-being. An unnatural calm possessedme. I knew that there was not a single shred of evidence against me, barring the fact that Iwas the last one known to be alone with the Professor. Nothing remained but ashes!
“I put on my hat and coat, told the butler that the Professor had leftword he was not to be disturbed, and that I was going out for the evening. Once outside, allmy self-possession vanished. My nerves were shot to pieces. I don’t know where I went—onlythat I wandered aimlessly, here and there, until I found myself outside your apartment justa little while ago.
“Prague, I felt as if I must talk with someone; that I must unburden mytortured mind. I knew that I could trust you, old pal, so I’ve told you the whole story.Here I am—do with me as you will. Life holds nothing more for me, now that—Marjorie—isgone!”
Bruce’s voice trembled with emotion and broke as he mentioned the name of the girlhe loved.
I leaned across the table, and gazed searchingly into the eyes of the abjectfigure that slouched dejectedly in the big chair. Then I rose, put on my hat and coat, crossedto Bruce, who had buried his head in his hands, and was shaking with silent sobs.
“Bruce!”
Malcolm Bruce raised his eyes.
“Bruce, listen to me. Are you sure Marjorie Purdy is dead?”
“Am I sure that—” His eyes widened at the suggestion, and hesat erect with a sudden start.
“Exactly,” I went on. “Are you positive that the ashes in thatjar were the ashes of Marjorie Purdy?”
“Why—I—see here, Prague! What are you driving at?”
“Then you’re not sure. You saw the girl’s hat and coatin that chair, and in your state of mind you jumped at conclusions. ‘The ashes must be thoseof the missing girl. .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The Professor must have made away with her.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’and all that. Come now, did Van Allister tell you anything—”
“I don’t know what he said. I tell you I went berserk—mad!”
“Then you come along with me. If she’s not dead, she must be somewherein that house, and if she is there, we’re going to find her!”
On the street we hailed a taxi, and in a few moments the butler admitted usto Van Allister’s home. Bruce let us into the laboratory with his key. The door of theworkshop was still ajar.
My eyes swept the room in a comprehensive survey. At the left over near thewindow, was a closed door. I strode across the room and tried the knob, but it refused to yield.
“Where does that lead?”
“Just an anteroom, where the Professor keeps his apparatus.”
“All the same, that door’s coming open,” I returned, grimly.Stepping back a pace or two, I planted a well-directed kick upon the door. Another, and stillanother, and the frame-work around the lock gave way.
“Bruce, with an inarticulate cry, sped across the room to a huge mahoganychest. He selected one of the keys on his ring, inserted it in the lock, and flung back thecover with trembling hands.
“Here she is, Prague—quick! Get her out where there’s air!”
Together we bore the limp figure of the girl into the laboratory. Bruce hastilymixed a concoction which he forced between her lips. A second dose, and her eyes slowly opened.
Her bewildered glance traveled around the room, at last resting on Bruce, andher eyes lighted with sudden, happy recognition. Later, after the first few moments of reunion,the girl told us her story:
“After Malcolm went out, this afternoon, the Professor sent word to meto come into the workshop. As he often summoned me to do some errand or other, I thought nothingof it, and to save time, took my hat and coat along. He closed the door of the little room,and, without warning, attacked me from behind. He overpowered me, tied me hand and foot. Itwas needless to gag me. As you know, the laboratory is absolutely sound-proof.
“Then he produced a huge Newfoundland dog he had secured from somewhereor other, reduced it to ashes before my very eyes, and put the ashes in a glass jar that wason a tabourette in the workshop.
“He went into the anteroom and, from the chest where you found me, tookout the glass casket. At least, it seemed a casket to my terror-stricken eyes! He mixed enoughof his horrible liquid to fill it almost to the brim.
“Then he told me that but one thing remained. That was—to performthe experiment upon a human being!” She shuddered at the recollection. “He dilatedat length upon what a privilege it would be for anyone to sacrifice his life in such a manner,for such a cause. Then he calmly informed me that he had selected you as the subject of hisexperiment, and that I was to play the role of witness! I fainted.
“The Professor must have feared some sort of intrusion, for the next Iremember is waking inside the chest where you discovered me. It was stifling! Every breath Itook came harder and harder. I thought of you, Malcolm—thought of the wonderful, happyhours we had spent together the last few days. I wondered what I would do when you were gone!I even prayed that he would kill me, too! My throat grew parched and dry—everything wentblack before my eyes.
“Next I opened them to find myself here—with you, Malcolm,”her voice sank to a hoarse, nervous whisper. “Where—where is the Professor?”
Bruce silently led her into the workshop. She shivered as the coffin of glasscame within her range of vision. Still silently, he crossed directly to the casket, and, takingup a handful of the soft, white ashes, let them sift slowly through his fingers!
