“I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.”
            —Shakespeare.                  

I have frequently wondered if the majority of mankind ever pause to reflect upon the occasionallytitanic significance of dreams, and of the obscure world to which they belong. Whilst the greaternumber of our nocturnal visions are perhaps no more than faint and fantastic reflections ofour waking experiences—Freud to the contrary with his puerile symbolism—there arestill a certain remainder whose immundane and ethereal character permits of no ordinary interpretation,and whose vaguely exciting and disquieting effect suggests possible minute glimpses into a sphereof mental existence no less important than physical life, yet separated from that life by anall but impassable barrier. From my experience I cannot doubt but that man, when lost to terrestrialconsciousness, is indeed sojourning in another and uncorporeal life of far different naturefrom the life we know; and of which only the slightest and most indistinct memories linger afterwaking. From those blurred and fragmentary memories we may infer much, yet prove little. Wemay guess that in dreams life, matter, and vitality, as the earth knows such things, are notnecessarily constant; and that time and space do not exist as our waking selves comprehend them.Sometimes I believe that this less material life is our truer life, and that our vain presenceon the terraqueous globe is itself the secondary or merely virtual phenomenon.
It was from a youthful reverie filled with speculations of this sort that Iarose one afternoon in the winter of 1900–1901, when to the state psychopathic institutionin which I served as an interne was brought the man whose case has ever since haunted me sounceasingly. His name, as given on the records, was Joe Slater, or Slaader, and his appearancewas that of the typical denizen of the Catskill Mountain region; one of those strange, repellentscions of a primitive colonial peasant stock whose isolation for nearly three centuries in thehilly fastnesses of a little-travelled countryside has caused them to sink to a kind of barbaricdegeneracy, rather than advance with their more fortunately placed brethren of the thickly settleddistricts. Among these odd folk, who correspond exactly to the decadent element of “whitetrash” in the South, law and morals are non-existent; and their general mental statusis probably below that of any other section of the native American people.
Joe Slater, who came to the institution in the vigilant custody of four statepolicemen, and who was described as a highly dangerous character, certainly presented no evidenceof his perilous disposition when first I beheld him. Though well above the middle stature, andof somewhat brawny frame, he was given an absurd appearance of harmless stupidity by the pale,sleepy blueness of his small watery eyes, the scantiness of his neglected and never-shaven growthof yellow beard, and the listless drooping of his heavy nether lip. His age was unknown, sinceamong his kind neither family records nor permanent family ties exist; but from the baldnessof his head in front, and from the decayed condition of his teeth, the head surgeon wrote himdown as a man of about forty.
From the medical and court documents we learned all that could be gatheredof his case. This man, a vagabond, hunter, and trapper, had always been strange in the eyesof his primitive associates. He had habitually slept at night beyond the ordinary time, andupon waking would often talk of unknown things in a manner so bizarre as to inspire fear evenin the hearts of an unimaginative populace. Not that his form of language was at all unusual,for he never spoke save in the debased patois of his environment; but the tone and tenor ofhis utterances were of such mysterious wildness, that none might listen without apprehension.He himself was generally as terrified and baffled as his auditors, and within an hour afterawakening would forget all that he had said, or at least all that had caused him to say whathe did; relapsing into a bovine, half-amiable normality like that of the other hill-dwellers.
As Slater grew older, it appeared, his matutinal aberrations had graduallyincreased in frequency and violence; till about a month before his arrival at the institutionhad occurred the shocking tragedy which caused his arrest by the authorities. One day near noon,after a profound sleep begun in a whiskey debauch at about five of the previous afternoon, theman had roused himself most suddenly; with ululations so horrible and unearthly that they broughtseveral neighbours to his cabin—a filthy sty where he dwelt with a family as indescribableas himself. Rushing out into the snow, he had flung his arms aloft and commenced a series ofleaps directly upward in the air; the while shouting his determination to reach some ‘big,big cabin with brightness in the roof and walls and floor, and the loud queer music far away’.As two men of moderate size sought to restrain him, he had struggled with maniacal force andfury, screaming of his desire and need to find and kill a certain ‘thing that shines andshakes and laughs’. At length, after temporarily felling one of his detainers with a suddenblow, he had flung himself upon the other in a daemoniac ecstasy of bloodthirstiness, shriekingfiendishly that he would ‘jump high in the air and burn his way through anything thatstopped him’. Family and neighbours had now fled in a panic, and when the more courageousof them returned, Slater was gone, leaving behind an unrecognisable pulp-like thing that hadbeen a living man but an hour before. None of the mountaineers had dared to pursue him, andit is likely that they would have welcomed his death from the cold; but when several morningslater they heard his screams from a distant ravine, they realised that he had somehow managedto survive, and that his removal in one way or another would be necessary. Then had followedan armed searching party, whose purpose (whatever it may have been originally) became that ofa sheriff’s posse after one of the seldom popular state troopers had by accident observed,then questioned, and finally joined the seekers.
On the third day Slater was found unconscious in the hollow of a tree, andtaken to the nearest gaol; where alienists from Albany examined him as soon as his senses returned.To them he told a simple story. He had, he said, gone to sleep one afternoon about sundown afterdrinking much liquor. He had awaked to find himself standing bloody-handed in the snow beforehis cabin, the mangled corpse of his neighbour Peter Slader at his feet. Horrified, he had takento the woods in a vague effort to escape from the scene of what must have been his crime. Beyondthese things he seemed to know nothing, nor could the expert questioning of his interrogatorsbring out a single additional fact. That night Slater slept quietly, and the next morning hewakened with no singular feature save a certain alteration of expression. Dr. Barnard, who hadbeen watching the patient, thought he noticed in the pale blue eyes a certain gleam of peculiarquality; and in the flaccid lips an all but imperceptible tightening, as if of intelligent determination.But when questioned, Slater relapsed into the habitual vacancy of the mountaineer, and onlyreiterated what he had said on the preceding day.
On the third morning occurred the first of the man’s mental attacks.After some show of uneasiness in sleep, he burst forth into a frenzy so powerful that the combinedefforts of four men were needed to bind him in a strait-jacket. The alienists listened withkeen attention to his words, since their curiosity had been aroused to a high pitch by the suggestiveyet mostly conflicting and incoherent stories of his family and neighbours. Slater raved forupward of fifteen minutes, babbling in his backwoods dialect of great edifices of light, oceansof space, strange music, and shadowy mountains and valleys. But most of all did he dwell uponsome mysterious blazing entity that shook and laughed and mocked at him. This vast, vague personalityseemed to have done him a terrible wrong, and to kill it in triumphant revenge was his paramountdesire. In order to reach it, he said, he would soar through abysses of emptiness, burningevery obstacle that stood in his way. Thus ran his discourse, until with the greatest suddennesshe ceased. The fire of madness died from his eyes, and in dull wonder he looked at his questionersand asked why he was bound. Dr. Barnard unbuckled the leathern harness and did not restore ittill night, when he succeeded in persuading Slater to don it of his own volition, for his owngood. The man had now admitted that he sometimes talked queerly, though he knew not why.
Within a week two more attacks appeared, but from them the doctors learnedlittle. On the source of Slater’s visions they speculated at length, for sincehe could neither read nor write, and had apparently never heard a legend or fairy tale, hisgorgeous imagery was quite inexplicable. That it could not come from any known myth or romancewas made especially clear by the fact that the unfortunate lunatic expressed himself only inhis own simple manner. He raved of things he did not understand and could not interpret; thingswhich he claimed to have experienced, but which he could not have learned through any normalor connected narration. The alienists soon agreed that abnormal dreams were the foundation ofthe trouble; dreams whose vividness could for a time completely dominate the waking mind ofthis basically inferior man. With due formality Slater was tried for murder, acquitted on theground of insanity, and committed to the institution wherein I held so humble a post.
I have said that I am a constant speculator concerning dream life, and fromthis you may judge of the eagerness with which I applied myself to the study of the new patientas soon as I had fully ascertained the facts of his case. He seemed to sense a certain friendlinessin me; born no doubt of the interest I could not conceal, and the gentle manner in which I questionedhim. Not that he ever recognised me during his attacks, when I hung breathlessly upon his chaoticbut cosmic word-pictures; but he knew me in his quiet hours, when he would sit by his barredwindow weaving baskets of straw and willow, and perhaps pining for the mountain freedom he couldnever enjoy again. His family never called to see him; probably it had found another temporaryhead, after the manner of decadent mountain folk.
By degrees I commenced to feel an overwhelming wonder at the mad and fantasticconceptions of Joe Slater. The man himself was pitiably inferior in mentality and language alike;but his glowing, titanic visions, though described in a barbarous and disjointed jargon, wereassuredly things which only a superior or even exceptional brain could conceive. How, I oftenasked myself, could the stolid imagination of a Catskill degenerate conjure up sights whosevery possession argued a lurking spark of genius? How could any backwoods dullard have gainedso much as an idea of those glittering realms of supernal radiance and space about which Slaterranted in his furious delirium? More and more I inclined to the belief that in the pitiful personalitywho cringed before me lay the disordered nucleus of something beyond my comprehension; somethinginfinitely beyond the comprehension of my more experienced but less imaginative medical andscientific colleagues.
And yet I could extract nothing definite from the man. The sum of all my investigationwas, that in a kind of semi-uncorporeal dream life Slater wandered or floated through resplendentand prodigious valleys, meadows, gardens, cities, and palaces of light; in a region unboundedand unknown to man. That there he was no peasant or degenerate, but a creature of importanceand vivid life; moving proudly and dominantly, and checked only by a certain deadly enemy, whoseemed to be a being of visible yet ethereal structure, and who did not appear to be of humanshape, since Slater never referred to it as a man, or as aught save a thing. Thisthing had done Slater some hideous but unnamed wrong, which the maniac (if maniac hewere) yearned to avenge. From the manner in which Slater alluded to their dealings, I judgedthat he and the luminous thing had met on equal terms; that in his dream existence theman was himself a luminous thing of the same race as his enemy. This impression was sustainedby his frequent references to flying through space and burning all that impededhis progress. Yet these conceptions were formulated in rustic words wholly inadequate to conveythem, a circumstance which drove me to the conclusion that if a true dream-world indeed existed,oral language was not its medium for the transmission of thought. Could it be that the dream-soulinhabiting this inferior body was desperately struggling to speak things which the simple andhalting tongue of dulness could not utter? Could it be that I was face to face with intellectualemanations which would explain the mystery if I could but learn to discover and read them? Idid not tell the older physicians of these things, for middle age is sceptical, cynical, anddisinclined to accept new ideas. Besides, the head of the institution had but lately warnedme in his paternal way that I was overworking; that my mind needed a rest.
It had long been my belief that human thought consists basically of atomicor molecular motion, convertible into ether waves of radiant energy like heat, light, and electricity.This belief had early led me to contemplate the possibility of telepathy or mental communicationby means of suitable apparatus, and I had in my college days prepared a set of transmittingand receiving instruments somewhat similar to the cumbrous devices employed in wireless telegraphyat that crude, pre-radio period. These I had tested with a fellow-student; but achieving noresult, had soon packed them away with other scientific odds and ends for possible future use.Now, in my intense desire to probe into the dream life of Joe Slater, I sought these instrumentsagain; and spent several days in repairing them for action. When they were complete once moreI missed no opportunity for their trial. At each outburst of Slater’s violence, I wouldfit the transmitter to his forehead and the receiver to my own; constantly making delicate adjustmentsfor various hypothetical wave-lengths of intellectual energy. I had but little notion of howthe thought-impressions would, if successfully conveyed, arouse an intelligent response in mybrain; but I felt certain that I could detect and interpret them. Accordingly I continued myexperiments, though informing no one of their nature.
It was on the twenty-first of February, 1901, that the thing finally occurred. As I look backacross the years I realise how unreal it seems; and sometimes half wonder if old Dr. Fentonwas not right when he charged it all to my excited imagination. I recall that he listened withgreat kindness and patience when I told him, but afterward gave me a nerve-powder and arrangedfor the half-year’s vacation on which I departed the next week. That fateful night I waswildly agitated and perturbed, for despite the excellent care he had received, Joe Slater wasunmistakably dying. Perhaps it was his mountain freedom that he missed, or perhaps the turmoilin his brain had grown too acute for his rather sluggish physique; but at all events the flameof vitality flickered low in the decadent body. He was drowsy near the end, and as darknessfell he dropped off into a troubled sleep. I did not strap on the strait-jacket as was customarywhen he slept, since I saw that he was too feeble to be dangerous, even if he woke in mentaldisorder once more before passing away. But I did place upon his head and mine the two endsof my cosmic “radio”; hoping against hope for a first and last message from thedream-world in the brief time remaining. In the cell with us was one nurse, a mediocre fellowwho did not understand the purpose of the apparatus, or think to inquire into my course. Asthe hours wore on I saw his head droop awkwardly in sleep, but I did not disturb him. I myself,lulled by the rhythmical breathing of the healthy and the dying man, must have nodded a littlelater.
The sound of weird lyric melody was what aroused me. Chords, vibrations, andharmonic ecstasies echoed passionately on every hand; while on my ravished sight burst the stupendousspectacle of ultimate beauty. Walls, columns, and architraves of living fire blazed effulgentlyaround the spot where I seemed to float in air; extending upward to an infinitely high vaulteddome of indescribable splendour. Blending with this display of palatial magnificence, or rather,supplanting it at times in kaleidoscopic rotation, were glimpses of wide plains and gracefulvalleys, high mountains and inviting grottoes; covered with every lovely attribute of scenerywhich my delighted eye could conceive of, yet formed wholly of some glowing, ethereal, plasticentity, which in consistency partook as much of spirit as of matter. As I gazed, I perceivedthat my own brain held the key to these enchanting metamorphoses; for each vista which appearedto me, was the one my changing mind most wished to behold. Amidst this elysian realm I dweltnot as a stranger, for each sight and sound was familiar to me; just as it had been for uncountedaeons of eternity before, and would be for like eternities to come.
Then the resplendent aura of my brother of light drew near and held colloquywith me, soul to soul, with silent and perfect interchange of thought. The hour was one of approachingtriumph, for was not my fellow-being escaping at last from a degrading periodic bondage; escapingforever, and preparing to follow the accursed oppressor even unto the uttermost fields of ether,that upon it might be wrought a flaming cosmic vengeance which would shake the spheres? We floatedthus for a little time, when I perceived a slight blurring and fading of the objects aroundus, as though some force were recalling me to earth—where I least wished to go. The formnear me seemed to feel a change also, for it gradually brought its discourse toward a conclusion,and itself prepared to quit the scene; fading from my sight at a rate somewhat less rapid thanthat of the other objects. A few more thoughts were exchanged, and I knew that the luminousone and I were being recalled to bondage, though for my brother of light it would be the lasttime. The sorry planet-shell being well-nigh spent, in less than an hour my fellow would befree to pursue the oppressor along the Milky Way and past the hither stars to the very confinesof infinity.
A well-defined shock separates my final impression of the fading scene of lightfrom my sudden and somewhat shamefaced awakening and straightening up in my chair as I saw thedying figure on the couch move hesitantly. Joe Slater was indeed awaking, though probably forthe last time. As I looked more closely, I saw that in the sallow cheeks shone spots of colourwhich had never before been present. The lips, too, seemed unusual; being tightly compressed,as if by the force of a stronger character than had been Slater’s. The whole face finallybegan to grow tense, and the head turned restlessly with closed eyes. I did not arouse the sleepingnurse, but readjusted the slightly disarranged head-bands of my telepathic “radio”,intent to catch any parting message the dreamer might have to deliver. All at once the headturned sharply in my direction and the eyes fell open, causing me to stare in blank amazementat what I beheld. The man who had been Joe Slater, the Catskill decadent, was now gazing atme with a pair of luminous, expanded eyes whose blue seemed subtly to have deepened. Neithermania nor degeneracy was visible in that gaze, and I felt beyond a doubt that I was viewinga face behind which lay an active mind of high order.
At this juncture my brain became aware of a steady external influence operatingupon it. I closed my eyes to concentrate my thoughts more profoundly, and was rewarded by thepositive knowledge that my long-sought mental message had come at last. Each transmittedidea formed rapidly in my mind, and though no actual language was employed, my habitual associationof conception and expression was so great that I seemed to be receiving the message in ordinaryEnglish.
“Joe Slater is dead,” came the soul-petrifying voice oragency from beyond the wall of sleep. My opened eyes sought the couch of pain in curious horror,but the blue eyes were still calmly gazing, and the countenance was still intelligently animated.“He is better dead, for he was unfit to bear the active intellect of cosmic entity. Hisgross body could not undergo the needed adjustments between ethereal life and planet life. Hewas too much of an animal, too little a man; yet it is through his deficiency that you havecome to discover me, for the cosmic and planet souls rightly should never meet. He has beenmy torment and diurnal prison for forty-two of your terrestrial years. I am an entity like thatwhich you yourself become in the freedom of dreamless sleep. I am your brother of light, andhave floated with you in the effulgent valleys. It is not permitted me to tell your waking earth-selfof your real self, but we are all roamers of vast spaces and travellers in many ages. Next yearI may be dwelling in the dark Egypt which you call ancient, or in the cruel empire of Tsan-Chanwhich is to come three thousand years hence. You and I have drifted to the worlds that reelabout the red Arcturus, and dwelt in the bodies of the insect-philosophers that crawl proudlyover the fourth moon of Jupiter. How little does the earth-self know of life and its extent!How little, indeed, ought it to know for its own tranquillity! Of the oppressor I cannot speak.You on earth have unwittingly felt its distant presence—you who without knowing idly gaveto its blinking beacon the name of Algol, the Daemon-Star. It is to meet and conquerthe oppressor that I have vainly striven for aeons, held back by bodily encumbrances. TonightI go as a Nemesis bearing just and blazingly cataclysmic vengeance. Watch me in the sky closeby the Daemon-Star. I cannot speak longer, for the body of Joe Slater grows cold and rigid,and the coarse brains are ceasing to vibrate as I wish. You have been my friend in the cosmos;you have been my only friend on this planet—the only soul to sense and seek for me withinthe repellent form which lies on this couch. We shall meet again—perhaps in the shiningmists of Orion’s Sword, perhaps on a bleak plateau in prehistoric Asia. Perhaps in unremembereddreams tonight; perhaps in some other form an aeon hence, when the solar system shall have beenswept away.”
At this point the thought-waves abruptly ceased, and the pale eyes of the dreamer—orcan I say dead man?—commenced to glaze fishily. In a half-stupor I crossed over to thecouch and felt of his wrist, but found it cold, stiff, and pulseless. The sallow cheeks paledagain, and the thick lips fell open, disclosing the repulsively rotten fangs of the degenerateJoe Slater. I shivered, pulled a blanket over the hideous face, and awakened the nurse. ThenI left the cell and went silently to my room. I had an insistent and unaccountable craving fora sleep whose dreams I should not remember.
The climax? What plain tale of science can boast of such a rhetorical effect?I have merely set down certain things appealing to me as facts, allowing you to construe themas you will. As I have already admitted, my superior, old Dr. Fenton, denies the reality ofeverything I have related. He vows that I was broken down with nervous strain, and badly inneed of the long vacation on full pay which he so generously gave me. He assures me on his professionalhonour that Joe Slater was but a low-grade paranoiac, whose fantastic notions must have comefrom the crude hereditary folk-tales which circulate in even the most decadent of communities.All this he tells me—yet I cannot forget what I saw in the sky on the night after Slaterdied. Lest you think me a biassed witness, another’s pen must add this final testimony,which may perhaps supply the climax you expect. I will quote the following account of the starNova Persei verbatim from the pages of that eminent astronomical authority, Prof. GarrettP. Serviss:
“On February 22, 1901, a marvellous new star was discovered by Dr. Anderson,of Edinburgh, not very far from Algol. No star had been visible at that point before.Within twenty-four hours the stranger had become so bright that it outshone Capella. In a weekor two it had visibly faded, and in the course of a few months it was hardly discernible withthe naked eye.”
