You ask me to explain why I am afraid of a draught of cool air; why I shiver more than othersupon entering a cold room, and seem nauseated and repelled when the chill of evening creepsthrough the heat of a mild autumn day. There are those who say I respond to cold as others doto a bad odour, and I am the last to deny the impression. What I will do is to relate the mosthorrible circumstance I ever encountered, and leave it to you to judge whether or not this formsa suitable explanation of my peculiarity.
It is a mistake to fancy that horror is associated inextricably with darkness,silence, and solitude. I found it in the glare of mid-afternoon, in the clangour of a metropolis,and in the teeming midst of a shabby and commonplace rooming-house with a prosaic landlady andtwo stalwart men by my side. In the spring of 1923 I had secured some dreary and unprofitablemagazine work in the city of New York; and being unable to pay any substantial rent, began driftingfrom one cheap boarding establishment to another in search of a room which might combine thequalities of decent cleanliness, endurable furnishings, and very reasonable price. It soon developedthat I had only a choice between different evils, but after a time I came upon a house in WestFourteenth Street which disgusted me much less than the others I had sampled.
The place was a four-story mansion of brownstone, dating apparently from thelate forties, and fitted with woodwork and marble whose stained and sullied splendour argueda descent from high levels of tasteful opulence. In the rooms, large and lofty, and decoratedwith impossible paper and ridiculously ornate stucco cornices, there lingered a depressing mustinessand hint of obscure cookery; but the floors were clean, the linen tolerably regular, and thehot water not too often cold or turned off, so that I came to regard it as at least a bearableplace to hibernate till one might really live again. The landlady, a slatternly, almost beardedSpanish woman named Herrero, did not annoy me with gossip or with criticisms of the late-burningelectric light in my third-floor front hall room; and my fellow-lodgers were as quiet and uncommunicativeas one might desire, being mostly Spaniards a little above the coarsest and crudest grade. Onlythe din of street cars in the thoroughfare below proved a serious annoyance.
I had been there about three weeks when the first odd incident occurred. Oneevening at about eight I heard a spattering on the floor and became suddenly aware that I hadbeen smelling the pungent odour of ammonia for some time. Looking about, I saw that the ceilingwas wet and dripping; the soaking apparently proceeding from a corner on the side toward thestreet. Anxious to stop the matter at its source, I hastened to the basement to tell the landlady;and was assured by her that the trouble would quickly be set right.
“Doctair Muñoz,” she cried as she rushed upstairs aheadof me, “he have speel hees chemicals. He ees too seeck for doctair heemself—seeckerand seecker all the time—but he weel not have no othair for help. He ees vairy queer inhees seeckness—all day he take funnee-smelling baths, and he cannot get excite or warm.All hees own housework he do—hees leetle room are full of bottles and machines, and hedo not work as doctair. But he was great once—my fathair in Barcelona have hear of heem—andonly joost now he feex a arm of the plumber that get hurt of sudden. He nevair go out, onlyon roof, and my boy Esteban he breeng heem hees food and laundry and mediceens and chemicals.My Gawd, the sal-ammoniac that man use for keep heem cool!”
Mrs. Herrero disappeared up the staircase to the fourth floor, and I returnedto my room. The ammonia ceased to drip, and as I cleaned up what had spilled and opened thewindow for air, I heard the landlady’s heavy footsteps above me. Dr. Muñoz I hadnever heard, save for certain sounds as of some gasoline-driven mechanism; since his step wassoft and gentle. I wondered for a moment what the strange affliction of this man might be, andwhether his obstinate refusal of outside aid were not the result of a rather baseless eccentricity.There is, I reflected tritely, an infinite deal of pathos in the state of an eminent personwho has come down in the world.
I might never have known Dr. Muñoz had it not been for the heart attackthat suddenly seized me one forenoon as I sat writing in my room. Physicians had told me ofthe danger of those spells, and I knew there was no time to be lost; so remembering what thelandlady had said about the invalid’s help of the injured workman, I dragged myself upstairsand knocked feebly at the door above mine. My knock was answered in good English by a curiousvoice some distance to the right, asking my name and business; and these things being stated,there came an opening of the door next to the one I had sought.
A rush of cool air greeted me; and though the day was one of the hottest oflate June, I shivered as I crossed the threshold into a large apartment whose rich and tastefuldecoration surprised me in this nest of squalor and seediness. A folding couch now filled itsdiurnal role of sofa, and the mahogany furniture, sumptuous hangings, old paintings, and mellowbookshelves all bespoke a gentleman’s study rather than a boarding-house bedroom. I nowsaw that the hall room above mine—the “leetle room” of bottles and machineswhich Mrs. Herrero had mentioned—was merely the laboratory of the doctor; and that hismain living quarters lay in the spacious adjoining room whose convenient alcoves and large contiguousbathroom permitted him to hide all dressers and obtrusive utilitarian devices. Dr. Muñoz,most certainly, was a man of birth, cultivation, and discrimination.
The figure before me was short but exquisitely proportioned, and clad in somewhatformal dress of perfect cut and fit. A high-bred face of masterful though not arrogant expressionwas adorned by a short iron-grey full beard, and an old-fashioned pince-nez shielded the full,dark eyes and surmounted an aquiline nose which gave a Moorish touch to a physiognomy otherwisedominantly Celtiberian. Thick, well-trimmed hair that argued the punctual calls of a barberwas parted gracefully above a high forehead; and the whole picture was one of striking intelligenceand superior blood and breeding.
Nevertheless, as I saw Dr. Muñoz in that blast of cool air, I felt arepugnance which nothing in his aspect could justify. Only his lividly inclined complexion andcoldness of touch could have afforded a physical basis for this feeling, and even these thingsshould have been excusable considering the man’s known invalidism. It might, too, havebeen the singular cold that alienated me; for such chilliness was abnormal on so hot a day,and the abnormal always excites aversion, distrust, and fear.
But repugnance was soon forgotten in admiration, for the strange physician’sextreme skill at once became manifest despite the ice-coldness and shakiness of his bloodless-lookinghands. He clearly understood my needs at a glance, and ministered to them with a master’sdeftness; the while reassuring me in a finely modulated though oddly hollow and timbreless voicethat he was the bitterest of sworn enemies to death, and had sunk his fortune and lost all hisfriends in a lifetime of bizarre experiment devoted to its bafflement and extirpation. Somethingof the benevolent fanatic seemed to reside in him, and he rambled on almost garrulously as hesounded my chest and mixed a suitable draught of drugs fetched from the smaller laboratory room.Evidently he found the society of a well-born man a rare novelty in this dingy environment,and was moved to unaccustomed speech as memories of better days surged over him.
His voice, if queer, was at least soothing; and I could not even perceive thathe breathed as the fluent sentences rolled urbanely out. He sought to distract my mind frommy own seizure by speaking of his theories and experiments; and I remember his tactfully consolingme about my weak heart by insisting that will and consciousness are stronger than organic lifeitself, so that if a bodily frame be but originally healthy and carefully preserved, it maythrough a scientific enhancement of these qualities retain a kind of nervous animation despitethe most serious impairments, defects, or even absences in the battery of specific organs. Hemight, he half jestingly said, some day teach me to live—or at least to possess some kindof conscious existence—without any heart at all! For his part, he was afflicted with acomplication of maladies requiring a very exact regimen which included constant cold. Any markedrise in temperature might, if prolonged, affect him fatally; and the frigidity of his habitation—some55 or 56 degrees Fahrenheit—was maintained by an absorption system of ammonia cooling,the gasoline engine of whose pumps I had often heard in my own room below.
Relieved of my seizure in a marvellously short while, I left the shivery placea disciple and devotee of the gifted recluse. After that I paid him frequent overcoated calls;listening while he told of secret researches and almost ghastly results, and trembling a bitwhen I examined the unconventional and astonishingly ancient volumes on his shelves. I was eventually,I may add, almost cured of my disease for all time by his skilful ministrations. It seems thathe did not scorn the incantations of the mediaevalists, since he believed these cryptic formulaeto contain rare psychological stimuli which might conceivably have singular effects on the substanceof a nervous system from which organic pulsations had fled. I was touched by his account ofthe aged Dr. Torres of Valencia, who had shared his earlier experiments with him through thegreat illness of eighteen years before, whence his present disorders proceeded. No sooner hadthe venerable practitioner saved his colleague than he himself succumbed to the grim enemy hehad fought. Perhaps the strain had been too great; for Dr. Muñoz made it whisperinglyclear—though not in detail—that the methods of healing had been most extraordinary,involving scenes and processes not welcomed by elderly and conservative Galens.
As the weeks passed, I observed with regret that my new friend was indeed slowlybut unmistakably losing ground physically, as Mrs. Herrero had suggested. The livid aspect ofhis countenance was intensified, his voice became more hollow and indistinct, his muscular motionswere less perfectly coördinated, and his mind and will displayed less resilience and initiative.Of this sad change he seemed by no means unaware, and little by little his expression and conversationboth took on a gruesome irony which restored in me something of the subtle repulsion I had originallyfelt.
He developed strange caprices, acquiring a fondness for exotic spices and Egyptianincense till his room smelled like the vault of a sepulchred Pharaoh in the Valley of Kings.At the same time his demands for cold air increased, and with my aid he amplified the ammoniapiping of his room and modified the pumps and feed of his refrigerating machine till he couldkeep the temperature as low as 34° or 40° and finally even 28°; the bathroom andlaboratory, of course, being less chilled, in order that water might not freeze, and that chemicalprocesses might not be impeded. The tenant adjoining him complained of the icy air from aroundthe connecting door, so I helped him fit heavy hangings to obviate the difficulty. A kind ofgrowing horror, of outré and morbid cast, seemed to possess him. He talked of death incessantly,but laughed hollowly when such things as burial or funeral arrangements were gently suggested.
All in all, he became a disconcerting and even gruesome companion; yet in mygratitude for his healing I could not well abandon him to the strangers around him, and wascareful to dust his room and attend to his needs each day, muffled in a heavy ulster which Ibought especially for the purpose. I likewise did much of his shopping, and gasped in bafflementat some of the chemicals he ordered from druggists and laboratory supply houses.
An increasing and unexplained atmosphere of panic seemed to rise around hisapartment. The whole house, as I have said, had a musty odour; but the smell in his room wasworse—and in spite of all the spices and incense, and the pungent chemicals of the nowincessant baths which he insisted on taking unaided. I perceived that it must be connected withhis ailment, and shuddered when I reflected on what that ailment might be. Mrs. Herrero crossedherself when she looked at him, and gave him up unreservedly to me; not even letting her sonEsteban continue to run errands for him. When I suggested other physicians, the sufferer wouldfly into as much of a rage as he seemed to dare to entertain. He evidently feared the physicaleffect of violent emotion, yet his will and driving force waxed rather than waned, and he refusedto be confined to his bed. The lassitude of his earlier ill days gave place to a return of hisfiery purpose, so that he seemed about to hurl defiance at the death-daemon even as that ancientenemy seized him. The pretence of eating, always curiously like a formality with him, he virtuallyabandoned; and mental power alone appeared to keep him from total collapse.
He acquired a habit of writing long documents of some sort, which he carefullysealed and filled with injunctions that I transmit them after his death to certain persons whomhe named—for the most part lettered East Indians, but including a once celebrated Frenchphysician now generally thought dead, and about whom the most inconceivable things had beenwhispered. As it happened, I burned all these papers undelivered and unopened. His aspect andvoice became utterly frightful, and his presence almost unbearable. One September day an unexpectedglimpse of him induced an epileptic fit in a man who had come to repair his electric desk lamp;a fit for which he prescribed effectively whilst keeping himself well out of sight. That man,oddly enough, had been through the terrors of the Great War without having incurred any frightso thorough.
Then, in the middle of October, the horror of horrors came with stupefyingsuddenness. One night about eleven the pump of the refrigerating machine broke down, so thatwithin three hours the process of ammonia cooling became impossible. Dr. Muñoz summonedme by thumping on the floor, and I worked desperately to repair the injury while my host cursedin a tone whose lifeless, rattling hollowness surpassed description. My amateur efforts, however,proved of no use; and when I had brought in a mechanic from a neighbouring all-night garagewe learned that nothing could be done till morning, when a new piston would have to be obtained.The moribund hermit’s rage and fear, swelling to grotesque proportions, seemed likelyto shatter what remained of his failing physique; and once a spasm caused him to clap his handsto his eyes and rush into the bathroom. He groped his way out with face tightly bandaged, andI never saw his eyes again.
The frigidity of the apartment was now sensibly diminishing, and at about 5a.m. the doctor retired to the bathroom, commanding me to keep him supplied with all the iceI could obtain at all-night drug stores and cafeterias. As I would return from my sometimesdiscouraging trips and lay my spoils before the closed bathroom door, I could hear a restlesssplashing within, and a thick voice croaking out the order for “More—more!”At length a warm day broke, and the shops opened one by one. I asked Esteban either to helpwith the ice-fetching whilst I obtained the pump piston, or to order the piston while I continuedwith the ice; but instructed by his mother, he absolutely refused.
Finally I hired a seedy-looking loafer whom I encountered on the corner ofEighth Avenue to keep the patient supplied with ice from a little shop where I introduced him,and applied myself diligently to the task of finding a pump piston and engaging workmen competentto install it. The task seemed interminable, and I raged almost as violently as the hermit whenI saw the hours slipping by in a breathless, foodless round of vain telephoning, and a hecticquest from place to place, hither and thither by subway and surface car. About noon I encountereda suitable supply house far downtown, and at approximately 1:30 p.m. arrived at my boarding-placewith the necessary paraphernalia and two sturdy and intelligent mechanics. I had done all Icould, and hoped I was in time.
Black terror, however, had preceded me. The house was in utter turmoil, andabove the chatter of awed voices I heard a man praying in a deep basso. Fiendish things werein the air, and lodgers told over the beads of their rosaries as they caught the odour frombeneath the doctor’s closed door. The lounger I had hired, it seems, had fled screamingand mad-eyed not long after his second delivery of ice; perhaps as a result of excessive curiosity.He could not, of course, have locked the door behind him; yet it was now fastened, presumablyfrom the inside. There was no sound within save a nameless sort of slow, thick dripping.
Briefly consulting with Mrs. Herrero and the workmen despite a fear that gnawedmy inmost soul, I advised the breaking down of the door; but the landlady found a way to turnthe key from the outside with some wire device. We had previously opened the doors of all theother rooms on that hall, and flung all the windows to the very top. Now, noses protected byhandkerchiefs, we tremblingly invaded the accursed south room which blazed with the warm sunof early afternoon.
A kind of dark, slimy trail led from the open bathroom door to the hall door,and thence to the desk, where a terrible little pool had accumulated. Something was scrawledthere in pencil in an awful, blind hand on a piece of paper hideously smeared as though by thevery claws that traced the hurried last words. Then the trail led to the couch and ended unutterably.
What was, or had been, on the couch I cannot and dare not say here. But thisis what I shiveringly puzzled out on the stickily smeared paper before I drew a match and burnedit to a crisp; what I puzzled out in terror as the landlady and two mechanics rushed franticallyfrom that hellish place to babble their incoherent stories at the nearest police station. Thenauseous words seemed well-nigh incredible in that yellow sunlight, with the clatter of carsand motor trucks ascending clamorously from crowded Fourteenth Street, yet I confess that Ibelieved them then. Whether I believe them now I honestly do not know. There are things aboutwhich it is better not to speculate, and all that I can say is that I hate the smell of ammonia,and grow faint at a draught of unusually cool air.
“The end,” ran that noisome scrawl, “is here. No more ice—theman looked and ran away. Warmer every minute, and the tissues can’t last. I fancy youknow—what I said about the will and the nerves and the preserved body after the organsceased to work. It was good theory, but couldn’t keep up indefinitely. There was a gradualdeterioration I had not foreseen. Dr. Torres knew, but the shock killed him. He couldn’tstand what he had to do—he had to get me in a strange, dark place when he minded my letterand nursed me back. And the organs never would work again. It had to be done my way—artificialpreservation—for you see I died that time eighteen years ago.”
