A little after noon on the twenty-eighth day of June, 1924, Dr. Morehouse stopped his machinebefore the Tanner place and four men alighted. The stone building, in perfect repair and freshness,stood near the road, and but for the swamp in the rear it would have possessed no trace of darksuggestion. The spotless white doorway was visible across a trim lawn for some distance downthe road; and as the doctor’s party approached, it could be seen that the heavy portalyawned wide open. Only the screen door was closed. The proximity of the house had imposed akind of nervous silence on the four men, for what lurked therein could only be imagined withvague terror. This terror underwent a marked abatement when the explorers heard distinctly thesound of Richard Blake’s typewriter.
Less than an hour before, a grown man had fled from that house, hatless, coatless,and screaming, to fall upon the doorstep of his nearest neighbor, half a mile away, babblingincoherently of “house”, “dark”, “swamp”, and “room”.Dr. Morehouse had needed no further spur to excited action when told that a slavering, maddenedcreature had burst out of the old Tanner home by the edge of the swamp. He had known that somethingwould happen when the two men had taken the accursed stone house—the man who had fled;and his master, Richard Blake, the author-poet from Boston, the genius who had gone into thewar with every nerve and sense alert and had come out as he was now; still debonair though halfa paralytic, still walking with song among the sights and sounds of living fantasy though shutforever from the physical world, deaf, dumb, and blind!
Blake had reveled in the weird traditions and shuddering hints about the houseand its former tenants. Such eldritch lore was an imaginative asset from whose enjoyment hisphysical state might not bar him. He had smiled at the prognostications of the superstitiousnatives. Now, with his sole companion fled in a mad ecstasy of panic fright, and himself lefthelpless with whatever had caused that fright, Blake might have less occasion to revel and smile!This, at least, was Dr. Morehouse’s reflection as he had faced the problem of the fugitiveand called on the puzzled cottager to help him track the matter down. The Morehouses were anold Fenham family, and the doctor’s grandfather had been one of those who burned the hermitSimeon Tanner’s body in 1819. Not even at this distance could the trained physician escapea spinal tingle at what was recorded of that burning—at the naive inferences drawn byignorant countrymen from a slight and meaningless conformation of the deceased. That tinglehe knew to be foolish, for trifling bony protuberances on the fore part of the skull are ofno significance, and often observable in bald-headed men.
Among the four men who ultimately set resolute faces toward that abhorrenthouse in the doctor’s care, there occurred a singularly awed exchange of vague legendsand half-furtive scraps of gossip handed down from curious grandmothers—legends and hintsseldom repeated and almost never systematically compared. They extended as far back as 1692,when a Tanner had perished on Gallows Hill in Salem after a witchcraft trial, but did not growintimate till the time the house was built—1747, though the ell was more recent. Not eventhen were the tales very numerous, for queer though the Tanners all were, it was only the lastof them, old Simeon, whom people desperately feared. He added to what he had inherited—addedhorribly, everyone whispered—and bricked up the windows of the southeast room, whose eastwall gave on the swamp. That was his study and library, and it had a door of double thicknesswith braces. It had been chopped through with axes that terrible winter night in 1819 when thestinking smoke had poured from the chimney and they found Tanner’s body in there—withthat expression on its face. It was because of that expression—not because of the twobony protuberances beneath the bushy white hair—that they had burned the body and thebooks and manuscripts it had had in that room. However, the short distance to the Tanner placewas covered before much important historical matter could be correlated.
As the doctor, at the head of the party, opened the screen door and enteredthe arched hallway, it was noticed that the sound of typewriting had suddenly ceased. At thispoint two of the men also thought they noticed a faint effusion of cold air strangely out ofkeeping with the great heat of the day, though they afterward refused to swear to this. Thehall was in perfect order, as were the various rooms entered in quest of the study where Blakewas presumably to be found. The author had furnished his home in exquisite Colonial taste; andthough having no help but the one manservant, he had succeeded in maintaining it in a stateof commendable neatness.
Dr. Morehouse led his men from room to room through the wide-open doors andarchways, at last finding the library or study which he sought—a fine southerly room onthe ground floor adjoining the once-dreaded study of Simeon Tanner, lined with the books whichthe servant communicated through an ingenious alphabet of touches, and the bulky Braille volumeswhich the author himself read with sensitive finger-tips. Richard Blake, of course, was there,seated as usual before his typewriter with a draft-scattered stack of newly written pages onthe table and floor, and one sheet still in the machine. He had stopped work, it appeared, withsome suddenness; perhaps because of a chill which had caused him to draw together the neck ofhis dressing-gown; and his head was turned toward the doorway of the sunny adjoining room ina manner quite singular for one whose lack of sight and hearing shuts out all sense of the externalworld.
On drawing nearer and crossing to where he could see the author’s face,Dr. Morehouse turned very pale and motioned to the others to stand back. He needed time to steadyhimself, and to dispel all possibility of hideous illusion. No longer did he need to speculatewhy they had burned old Simeon Tanner’s body on that wintry night because of the expressionit wore, for here was something only a well-disciplined mind could confront. The late RichardBlake, whose typewriter had ceased its nonchalant clicking only as the men had entered the house,had seen something despite his blindness, and had been affected by it. Humanity had nothingto do with the look that was on his face, or with the glassy morbid vision that blazed in great,blue, bloodshot eyes shut to this world’s images for six years. Those eyes were fixedwith an ecstasy of clear-sighted horror on the doorway leading to Simeon Tanner’s oldstudy, where the sun blazed on walls once shrouded in bricked-up blackness. And Dr. Arlo Morehousereeled dizzily when he saw that for all the dazzling daylight the inky pupils of those eyeswere dilated as cavernously as those of a cat’s eyes in the dark.
The doctor closed the staring blind eyes before he let the others view theface of the corpse. Meanwhile he examined the lifeless form with feverish diligence, using scrupuloustechnical care, despite his throbbing nerves and almost shaking hands. Some of his results hecommunicated from time to time to the awed and inquisitive trio around him; other results hejudiciously withheld, lest they lead to speculations more disquieting than human speculationsshould be. It was not from any word of his, but from shrewd independent observation, that oneof the men muttered about the body’s tousled black hair and the way the papers were scattered.This man said it was as if a strong breeze had blown through the open doorway which the deadman faced; whereas, although the once-bricked windows beyond were indeed fully open to the warmJune air, there had been scarcely a breath of wind during the entire day.
When one of the men began to gather the sheets of newly written manuscriptas they lay on floor and table, Dr. Morehouse stopped him with an alarmed gesture. He had seenthe sheet that remained in the machine, and had hastily removed and pocketed it after a sentenceor two blanched his face afresh. This incident prompted him to collect the scattered sheetshimself, and stuff them bulkily into an inside pocket without stopping to arrange them. Andnot even what he had read terrified him half so much as what he now noticed—the subtledifference in touch and heaviness of typing which distinguished the sheets he picked up fromthe one he had found on the typewriter. This shadowy impression he could not divorce from thatother horrible circumstance which he was so zealously concealing from the men who had heardthe machine’s clicking not ten minutes before—the circumstance he was trying toexclude from even his own mind till he could be alone and resting in the merciful depths ofhis Morris chair. One may judge of the fear he felt at that circumstance by considering whathe braved to keep it suppressed. In more than thirty years of professional practice he had neverregarded a medical examiner as one from whom a fact might be withheld; yet through all the formalitieswhich now followed, no man ever knew that when he examined this staring, contorted, blind man’sbody he had seen at once that death must have occurred at least half an hour before discovery.
Dr. Morehouse presently closed the outer door and led the party through everycorner of the ancient structure in search of any evidence which might directly illuminate thetragedy. Never was a result more completely negative. He knew that the trap-door of old SimeonTanner had been removed as soon as that recluse’s books and body had been burnt, and thatthe sub-cellar and the sinuous tunnel under the swamp had been filled up as soon as they werediscovered, some thirty-five years later. Now he saw that no fresh abnormalities had come toreplace them, and that the whole establishment exhibited only the normal neatness of modernrestoration and tasteful care.
Telephoning for the sheriff at Fenham and for the county medical examiner atBayboro, he awaited the arrival of the former, who, when he came, insisted on swearing in twoof the men as deputies until the examiner should arrive. Dr. Morehouse, knowing the mystificationand futility confronting the officials, could not help smiling wryly as he left with the villagerwhose house still sheltered the man who had fled.
They found the patient exceedingly weak, but conscious and fairly composed.Having promised the sheriff to extract and transmit all possible information from the fugitive,Dr. Morehouse began some calm and tactful questioning, which was received in a rational andcompliant spirit and baffled only by effacement of memory. Much of the man’s quiet musthave come from merciful inability to recollect, for all he could now tell was that he had beenin the study with his master and had seemed to see the next room suddenly grow dark—theroom where sunshine had for more than a hundred years replaced the gloom of bricked-up windows.Even this memory, which indeed he half doubted, greatly disturbed the unstrung nerves of thepatient, and it was with the utmost gentleness and circumspection that Dr. Morehouse told himhis master was dead—a natural victim of the cardiac weakness which his terrible wartimeinjuries must have caused. The man was grieved, for he had been devoted to the crippled author;but he promised to show fortitude in taking the body back to the family in Boston after theclose of the medical examiner’s formal inquiry.
The physician, after satisfying as vaguely as possible the curiosity of thehouseholder and his wife, and urging them to shelter the patient and keep him from the Tannerhouse until his departure with the body, next drove home in a growing tremble of excitement.At last he was free to read the typed manuscript of the dead man, and to gain at least an inklingof what hellish thing had defied those shattered senses of sight and sound and penetrated sodisastrously to the delicate intelligence that brooded in external darkness and silence. Heknew it would be a grotesque and terrible perusal, and he did not hasten to begin it. Instead,he very deliberately put his car in the garage, made himself comfortable in a dressing-gown,and placed a stand of sedative and restorative medicines beside the great chair he was to occupy.Even after that he obviously wasted time as he slowly arranged the numbered sheets, carefullyavoiding any comprehensive glance at their text.
What the manuscript did to Dr. Morehouse we all know. It would never have beenread by another had his wife not picked it up as he lay inert in his chair an hour later, breathingheavily and unresponsive to a knocking which one would have thought violent enough to arousea mummied Pharaoh. Terrible as the document is, particularly in the obvious change of stylenear the end, we cannot avoid the belief that to the folklore-wise physician it presented someadded and supreme horror which no other will ever be so unfortunate as to receive. Certainly,it is the general opinion of Fenham that the doctor’s wide familiarity with the mutteringsof old people and the tales his grandfather told him in youth furnished him some special information,in the light of which Richard Blake’s hideous chronicle acquired a new, clear, and devastatingsignificance nearly insupportable to the normal human mind. That would explain the slownessof his recovery on that June evening, the reluctance with which he permitted his wife and sonto read the manuscript, the singular ill-grace with which he acceded to their determinationnot to burn a document so darkly remarkable, and most of all, the peculiar rashness with whichhe hastened to purchase the old Tanner property, destroy the house with dynamite, and cut downthe trees of the swamp for a substantial distance from the road. Concerning the whole subjecthe now maintains an inflexible reticence, and it is certain that there will die with him a knowledgewithout which the world is better off.
The manuscript, as here appended, was copied through the courtesy of FloydMorehouse, Esq., son of the physician. A few omissions, indicated by asterisks, have been madein the interest of the public peace of mind; still others have been occasioned by the indefinitenessof the text, where the stricken author’s lightning-like touch-typing seems shaken intoincoherence or ambiguity. In three places, where lacunae are fairly well elucidated by the context,the task of recension has been attempted. Of the change in style near the end it werebest to say nothing. Surely it is plausible enough to attribute the phenomenon, as regards bothcontent and physical aspect of typing, to the racked and tottering mind of a victim whose formerhandicaps had paled to nothing before that which he now faced. Bolder minds are at liberty tosupply their own deductions.
Here, then, is the document, written in an accursed house by a brain closedto the world’s sights and sounds—a brain left alone and unwarned to the merciesand mockeries of powers that no seeing, hearing man has ever stayed to face. Contradictory asit is to all that we know of the universe through physics, chemistry, and biology, the logicalmind will classify it as a singular product of dementia—a dementia communicated in somesympathetic way to the man who burst out of that house in time. And thus, indeed, may it verywell be regarded so long as Dr. Arlo Morehouse maintains his silence.

THE MANUSCRIPT

Vague misgivings of the last quarter hour are now becoming definite fears.To begin with, I am thoroughly convinced that something must have happened to Dobbs. For thefirst time since we have been together he has failed to answer my summons. When he did not respondto my repeated ringing I decided that the bell must be out of order, but I have pounded on thetable with vigor enough to rouse a charge of Charon. At first I thought he might have slippedout of the house for a breath of fresh air, for it has been hot and sultry all the forenoon,but it is not like Dobbs to stay away so long without first making sure that I would want nothing.It is, however, the unusual occurrence of the last few minutes which confirms my suspicion thatDobbs’s absence is a matter beyond his control. It is this same happening which promptsme to put my impressions and conjectures on paper in the hope that the mere act of recordingthem may relieve a certain sinister suggestion of impending tragedy. Try as I will, I cannotfree my mind from the legends connected with this old house—mere superstitious fol-de-rolfor dwarfed brains to revel in, and on which I would not even waste a thought if Dobbs werehere.
Through the years that I have been shut away from the world I used to know,Dobbs has been my sixth sense. Now, for the first time since my incapacitation, I realize thefull extent of my impotency. It is Dobbs who had compensated for my sightless eyes, my uselessears, my voiceless throat, and my crippled legs. There is a glass of water on my typewritertable. Without Dobbs to fill it when it has been emptied, my plight will be like that of Tantalus.Few have come to this house since we have lived here—there is little in common betweengarrulous country folk and a paralytic who cannot see, hear, or speak to them—it may bedays before anyone else appears. Alone&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with only my thoughts to keep mecompany; disquieting thoughts which have been in no wise assuaged by the sensations of the lastfew minutes. I do not like these sensations, either, for more and more they are converting merevillage gossip into a fantastic imagery which affects my emotions in a most peculiar and almostunprecedented manner.
It seems hours since I started to write this, but I know it can be only a fewminutes, for I have just inserted this fresh page into the machine. The mechanical action ofswitching the sheets, brief though it was, has given me a fresh grip on myself. Perhaps I canshake off this sense of approaching danger long enough to recount that which has already happened.
At first it was no more than a mere tremor, somewhat similar to the shiveringof a cheap tenement block when a heavy truck rumbles close by the curb—but this is noloosely built frame structure. Perhaps I am supersensitive to such things, and it may be thatI am allowing my imagination to play tricks; but it seemed to me that the disturbance was morepronounced directly in front of me—and my chair faces the southeast wing; away from theroad, directly in line with the swamp at the rear of the dwelling! Delusion though this mayhave been, there is no denying what followed. I was reminded of moments when I have felt theground tremble beneath my feet at the bursting of giant shells; times when I have seen shipstossed like chaff before the fury of a typhoon. The house shook like a Dweurgarian cinder inthe sieves of Niflheim. Every timber in the floor beneath my feet quivered like a sufferingthing. My typewriter trembled till I could imagine that the keys were chattering of their fear.
A brief moment and it was over. Everything is as calm as before. Altogethertoo calm! It seems impossible that such a thing could happen and yet leave everything exactlyas it was before. No, not exactly—I am thoroughly convinced that something has happenedto Dobbs! It is this conviction, added to this unnatural calm, which accentuates the premonitoryfear that persists in creeping over me. Fear? Yes—though I am trying to reason sanelywith myself that there is nothing of which to be afraid. Critics have both praised and condemnedmy poetry because of what they term a vivid imagination. At such a time as this I can heartilyagree with those who cry “too vivid”. Nothing can be very much amiss or.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Smoke! Just a faint sulfurous trace, but one which is unmistakable to my keenlyattuned nostrils. So faint, indeed, that it is impossible for me to determine whether it comesfrom some part of the house or drifts through the window of the adjoining room, which openson the swamp. The impression is rapidly becoming more clearly defined. I am sure, now, thatit does not come from outside. Vagrant visions of the past, somber scenes of other days, flashbefore me in stereoscopic review. A flaming factory&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hysterical screamsof terrified women penned in by walls of fire; a blazing schoolhouse&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. pitifulcries of helpless children trapped by collapsing stairs, a theatre fire&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.frantic babel of panic-stricken people fighting to freedom over blistering floors; and, overall, impenetrable clouds of black, noxious, malicious smoke polluting the peaceful sky. Theair of the room is saturated with thick, heavy, stifling waves&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at any momentI expect to feel hot tongues of flame lick eagerly at my useless legs&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. myeyes smart&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. my ears throb&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I cough and choke to ridmy lungs of the Ocypetean fumes&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. smoke such as is associated only with appallingcatastrophes&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. acrid, stinking, mephitic smoke permeated with the revoltingodor of burning flesh *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
Once more I am alone with this portentous calm. The welcome breeze that fansmy cheeks is fast restoring my vanished courage. Clearly, the house cannot be on fire, for everyvestige of the torturous smoke is gone. I cannot detect a single trace of it, though I havebeen sniffing like a bloodhound. I am beginning to wonder if I am going mad; if the years ofsolitude have unhinged my mind—but the phenomenon has been too definite to permit me toclass it as mere hallucination. Sane or insane, I cannot conceive these things as aught butactualities—and the moment I catalogue them as such I can come to only one logical conclusion.The inference in itself is enough to upset one’s mental stability. To concede this isto grant the truth of the superstitious rumors which Dobbs compiled from the villagers and transcribedfor my sensitive finger-tips to read—unsubstantial hearsay that my materialistic mindinstinctively condemns as asininity!
I wish the throbbing in my ears would stop! It is as if mad spectral playerswere beating a duet upon the aching drums. I suppose it is merely a reaction to the suffocatingsensations I have just experienced. A few more deep drafts of this refreshing air&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Something—someone is in the room! I am as sure I am no longer alone asif I could see the presence I sense so infallibly. It is an impression quite similar to onewhich I have had while elbowing my way through a crowded street—the definite notion thateyes were singling me out from the rest of the throng with a gaze intense enough to arrest mysubconscious attention—the same sensation, only magnified a thousandfold. Who—what—canit be? After all, my fears may be groundless, perhaps it means only that Dobbs has returned.No&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it is not Dobbs. As I anticipated, the tattoo upon my ears has ceasedand a low whisper has caught my attention&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the overwhelming significanceof the thing has just registered itself upon my bewildered brain&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I canhear!
It is not a single whispering voice, but many! *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* Lecherous buzzingof bestial blowflies . .&nbsp;. Satanic humming of libidinous bees&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. sibilanthissing of obscene reptiles&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a whispering chorus no human throat could sing!It is gaining in volume&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the room rings with demoniacal chanting; tuneless,toneless, and grotesquely grim&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a diabolical choir rehearsing unholy litanies&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.paeans of Mephistophelian misery set to music of wailing souls&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a hideouscrescendo of pagan pandemonium *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
The voices that surround me are drawing closer to my chair. The chanting hascome to an abrupt end and the whispering has resolved itself into intelligible sounds. I strainmy ears to distinguish the words. Closer&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and still closer. They are clear,now—too clear! Better had my ears been blocked forever than forced to listen to theirhellish mouthings *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
Impious revelations of soul-sickening Saturnalia *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* ghoulish conceptionsof devastating debaucheries *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* profane bribes of Cabirian orgies *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*malevolent threats of unimagined punishments *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
It is cold. Unseasonably cold! As if inspired by the cacodemoniacal presencesthat harass me, the breeze that was so friendly a few minutes ago growls angrily about my ears—anicy gale that rushes in from the swamp and chills me to the bone.
If Dobbs has deserted me I do not blame him. I hold no brief for cowardiceor craven fear, but there are some things *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* I only hope his fate has been nothingworse than to have departed in time!
My last doubt is swept away. I am doubly glad, now, that I have held to myresolve to write down my impressions&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not that I expect anyone to understand&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.or believe&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it has been a relief from the maddening strain of idly waitingfor each new manifestation of psychic abnormality. As I see it, there are but three coursesthat may be taken: to flee from this accursed place and spend the torturous years that lie aheadin trying to forget—but flee I cannot; to yield to an abominable alliance withforces so malign that Tartarus to them would seem but an alcove of Paradise—but yieldI will not; to die—far rather would I have my body torn limb from limb than tocontaminate my soul in barbarous barter with such emissaries of Belial *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
I have had to pause for a moment to blow upon my fingers. The room is coldwith the foetid frigor of the tomb&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a peaceful numbness is creeping overme&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I must fight off this lassitude; it is undermining my determinationto die rather than give in to the insidious importunings&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I vow, anew, toresist until the end&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the end that I know cannot be far away *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
The wind is colder than ever, if such a thing be possible&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.a wind freighted with the stench of dead-alive things *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* O merciful God Who tookmy sight! *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* a wind so cold it burns where it should freeze&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.it has become a blistering sirocco *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
Unseen fingers grip me&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ghost fingers that lack the physicalstrength to force me from my machine&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. icy fingers that force me into a vilevortex of vice&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. devil-fingers that draw me down into a cesspool of eternaliniquity&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. death fingers that shut off my breath and make my sightless eyesfeel they must burst with the pain *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* frozen points press against my temples *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*hard, bony knobs, akin to horns *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* boreal breath of some long-dead thing kissesmy fevered lips and sears my hot throat with frozen flame *&nbsp;*&nbsp;*
It is dark *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* not the darkness that is part of years of blindness*&nbsp;*&nbsp;* the impenetrable darkness of sin-steeped night *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* the pitch-blackdarkness of Purgatory *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* 
I see *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* spes mea Christus! *&nbsp;*&nbsp;* it is the end*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*

*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*&nbsp;*

Not for mortal mind is any resisting of force beyond human imagination.Not for immortal spirit is any conquering of that which hath probed the depths and made of immortalitya transient moment. The end? Nay! It is but the blissful beginning.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
