[pp. 1–6:]
It was in the summer of 1927 that I suddenly cut short my sightseeing tour of New England andreturned to Cleveland under a nervous strain. I have seldom mentioned the particulars of this trip,and hardly know why I do so now except that a recent newspaper cutting has somehow relieved thetension which formerly existed. A sweeping fire, it appears, has wiped out most of the emptyancient houses along the deserted Innsmouth waterfront as well as a certain number of buildingsfarther inland; while a singularly simultaneous explosion, heard for many miles around, hasdestroyed to a vast depth the great black reef a mile and a half out from shore where thesea-bottom abruptly falls to form an incalculable abyss. For certain reasons I take greatsatisfaction in these occurrences, even the first of which seems to me a blessing rather than adisaster. Especially am I glad that the old brick jewellery factory and the pillared Order of DagonHall have gone along with the rest. There is talk of incendiarism, and I suppose old FatherIwanicki could tell much if he chose; but what I know gives a very unusual angle to myopinion.
I never heard of Innsmouth till the day before I saw it for the first and lasttime. It does not seem to be mentioned on any modern map, and I was planning to go directly fromNewburyport to Arkham, and thence to Gloucester, if I could find transportation. I had no car, butwas travelling by motor coach, train, and trolley, always seeking the cheapest possible route. InNewburyport they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to Arkham; and it was only atthe station ticket office, when I demurred at the high fare, that I heard about Innsmouth. Theagent, whose speech shewed him to be no local man, seemed sympathetic toward my efforts at economy,and made a suggestion that none of my other informants had offered,
“You could take that old bus, I suppose,” he said with a certainhesitation, “but it isn’t thought much of hereabouts. It goes throughInnsmouth—you may have heard about that—and so the people don’t like it. Run byan Innsmouth man—Joe Sargent—but never gets any custom from here, or from Arkhameither, I guess. Wonder it keeps running at all. I suppose it’s cheap enough, but I never seemore than two or three people in it—nobody but those Innsmouth folks. Leaves theSquare—front of Hammond’s Drug Store—at 10 a.m. and 7 p.m. unless they’vechanged lately. Looks like a terrible rattletrap—I’ve never been on it.”
That was the first I ever heard of Innsmouth. Any reference to a town not listedin the guidebooks would have interested me, and the agent’s odd manner of allusion rousedsomething like real curiosity. A town able to inspire such dislike in its neighbours, I thought,must be at least rather unusual, and worthy of a sightseer’s attention. If it came beforeArkham I would stop off there—and so I asked the agent to tell me something about it.
He was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling somewhat superior to whathe said.
“Innsmouth? Well, it’s a queer kind of a town down at the mouth of theManuxet. It used to be almost a city—quite a seaport before the War of 1812—but theplace has all gone to pieces in the last hundred years or so. There’s no railroad—the B&amp; M never went through there, and the branch line from Rowley was given up years ago. Moreempty houses than there are people, I guess, and no business to speak of. Everybody trades eitherhere or in Arkham or Ipswich. At one time they had quite a number of mills there, butnothing’s left now but one jewellery refinery.
“That’s a pretty prominent proposition, though—all thetravelling salesmen seem to know about it. Makes a special kind of fancy jewellery out of a secretalloy that nobody can analyse very well. They say it’s platinum, silver, and gold—butthese people sell it so cheap that you can hardly believe it. Guess they have a corner on that kindof goods.
“Old man Marsh, who owns the thing, must be richer than Croesus. Queer oldduck, though, and sticks pretty close around the town. He’s the grandson of Capt. Obed Marsh,who founded the business. His mother was some kind of foreigner—they say a South Seanative—so everybody raised Cain when he married an Ipswich girl fifty years ago. They alwaysdo that about Innsmouth people. But his children and grandchildren look just like anybody else sofar as I can see. I’ve had ’em pointed out to me here. Never saw the old man.
“And why is everybody so down on Innsmouth? Well—you mustn’ttake too much stock in what people around here say. They’re hard to get started, but oncethey do get started they never stop. They’ve been telling things aboutInnsmouth—whispering ’em, mostly—for the last hundred years, I guess, and Igather they’re more scared than anything else. Some of the stories would make youlaugh—about old Captain Marsh driving bargains with the devil and bringing imps out of hellto live in Innsmouth, or about some kind of devil-worship and awful sacrifices in some place nearthe wharves that people stumbled on around 1850 or thereabouts—but I come from Panton,Vermont, and that kind of story doesn’t go down with me.
“The real thing behind all this is simply race prejudice—and Idon’t say I’m blaming those that hold it. I hate those Innsmouth folks myself, and Iwouldn’t care to go to their town. I suppose you know—though I can see you’re aWesterner by the way you talk—what a lot our New England ships used to have to do with queerports in Asia, Africa, the South Seas, and everywhere else, and what queer kinds of people theysometimes brought back with them. You’ve probably heard about the Salem man that came backwith a Chinese wife, and maybe you know there’s still a colony of Fiji Islanders somewherearound Cape Cod.
“Well, there must be something like that back of the Innsmouth people. Theplace was always badly cut off from the rest of the country by salt marshes and inlets, and wecan’t be sure about the ins and outs of the matter, but it’s pretty plain that oldCaptain Marsh must have brought home some odd specimens when he had all three of his ships incommission back in the 1830’s and 1840’s. There certainly is a strange kind of a streakin the Innsmouth folks today—I don’t know how to express it, but it sort of makes mecrawl. You’ll notice it a little in Joe Sargent if you take that bus. Some of them have flatnoses, big mouths, weak retreating chins, and a funny kind of rough grey skin. The sides of theirnecks are sort of shrivelled or creased up, and they get bald very young. Nobody around here or inArkham will have anything to do with them, and they act kind of offish themselves when they come totown. They used to ride on the railroad, walking and taking the train at Rowley or Ipswich, but nowthey use that bus.
“Yes, there’s a hotel in Innsmouth—called the GilmanHouse—but I don’t believe it can amount to much. I wouldn’t advise you to try it.Better stay over here and take the ten o’clock bus tomorrow morning.  Then you can get anevening bus there for Arkham at 8 o’clock. There was a factory inspector who stopped at theGilman a couple of years ago, and he had a lot of unpleasant hints about the place. It seems theyget a queer crowd there, for this fellow heard voices in other rooms that gave him the shivers. Itwas foreign talk, but he said the bad thing about it was the kind of voice that sometimes spoke. Itsounded so unnatural—slopping-like, he said—that he didn’t dare go to sleep. Justkept dressed and lit out early in the morning. The talk went on most of the night.
“This man—Casey, his name was—had a lot to say about the oldMarsh factory, and what he said fitted in very well with some of the wild stories. The books werein no kind of shape, and the machinery looked old and almost abandoned, as if it hadn’t beenrun a great deal. The place still used water power from the Lower Falls of the Manuxet. There wereonly a few employees, and they didn’t seem to be doing much. It made me think, when he toldme, about the local rumours that Marsh doesn’t actually make the stuff he sells. Many peoplesay he doesn’t get enough factory supplies to be really running the place, and that he mustbe importing those queer ornaments from somewhere—heaven knows where. I don’t believethat, though. The Marshes have been selling those outlandish rings and armlets and tiaras andthings for nearly a hundred years; and if there were anywhere else where they got ’em, thegeneral public would have found out all about it by this time. Then, too, there’s no shippingor in-bound trucking around Innsmouth that would account for such imports. What does get importedis the queerest kind of glass and rubber trinkets—makes you think of what they used to buy inthe old days to trade with savages. But it’s a straight fact that all inspectors run upagainst queer things at the plant. Twenty odd years ago one of them disappeared atInnsmouth—never heard of again—and I myself knew George Cole, who went insane downthere one night, and had to be lugged away by two men from the Danvers asylum, where he is now. Hetalks of some kind of sound and shrieks things about ‘scaly water-devils’.
“And that makes me think of another of the old stories—about the blackreef off the coast. Devil’s Reef, they call it. It’s almost above water a good part ofthe time, but at that you could hardly call it a real island. The story is that there’s awhole legion of devils seen sometimes on that reef—sprawled about, or darting in and out ofsome kind of caves near the top. It’s a rugged, uneven thing, a good bit over a mile out, andsailors used to make great detours just to avoid it. One of the things they had against CaptainMarsh was that he used to land on it sometimes when it was fairly dry. Probably the rock formationinterested him, but there was talk about his having dealings with demons. That was before the bigepidemic of 1846, when over half the people in Innsmouth were carried off. They never did quitefigure out what the trouble was, but it was probably some foreign kind of disease brought fromChina or somewhere by the shipping.
“Maybe that plague took off the best blood in Innsmouth. Anyway,they’re a doubtful lot now—and there can’t be more than 500 or 600 of them. Therich Marshes are as bad as any. I guess they’re all what people call ‘whitetrash’ down South—lawless and sly, and full of secret doings. Lobster fishermen,mostly—exporting by truck. Nobody can ever keep track of ’em, and state schoolofficials and census people have a devil of a time. That’s why I wouldn’t go at nightif I were you. I’ve never been there and have no wish to go, but I guess a daytime tripwouldn’t hurt you—even though the people here will advise you not to take it. Ifyou’re just sightseeing, Innsmouth ought to be quite a place for you.”
And so I spent that evening at the Newburyport Public Library looking up dataabout Innsmouth. When I had tried to question natives in the shops, the lunch room, and the firestation I had found them even harder to get started than the ticket agent had predicted, andrealised that I could not spare the time to overcome their first instinctive reticence. They had akind of obscure suspiciousness. At the YMCA the clerk merely discouraged my going to such a dismal,decadent place, and the people at the library shewed much the same attitude, holding Innsmouth tobe merely an exaggerated case of civic degeneration.
The Essex County histories on the shelves had very little to say, except that thetown was founded in 1643, noted for shipbuilding before the Revolution, a seat of great marineprosperity in the early nineteenth century, and later on a minor factory centre using the Manuxetas power. References to decline were very few, though the significance of the later records wasunmistakable. After the Civil War all industrial life centred in the Marsh Refining Company at theLower Falls, and the marketing of its products formed the only remaining bit of major commerce.There were very few foreigners; mostly Poles and Portuguese on the southern fringe of the town.Local finances were very bad, and but for the Marsh factory the place would have beenbankrupt.
I saw a good many booklets and catalogues and advertising calendars of the MarshRefining Company in the business department of the library, and began to realise what a strikingthing that lone industry was. The jewels and ornaments it sold were of the finest possible artistryand the most extreme originality; so delicately wrought, indeed, that one could not doubt but thathandicraft played a large part in at least their final stages of manufacture. Some of the half-tonepictures of them interested me profoundly, for the strangeness and beauty of the designs seemed tomy eye indicative of a profound and exotic genius—a genius so spectacular and bizarre thatone could not help wondering whence the inspiration had come. It was easy to credit the boast ofone of the booklets that this jewellery was a favourite with persons of sophisticated taste, andthat several specimens were exhibited in museums of modern craftsmanship.
Large pieces predominated—armlets, tiaras, and elaborate pendants—butrings and lesser items were numerous. The raised or incised designs—partly conventional andpartly with a curious marine motif—were wrought in a style of tremendous distinctiveness andof utter dissimilarity to the art traditions of any race or epoch I knew about. This other-worldlycharacter was emphasised by the oddness of the precious alloy, whose general effect was suggestedin several colour-plates. Something about these pictured things fascinated meintensely—almost disproportionately—and I resolved to see as many original specimens aspossible both at Innsmouth and in shops and museums elsewhere. Yet there was a distinct element ofrepulsion mixed with the fascination; proceeding, perhaps, from the evil and silly old legendsabout the founder of the business which the ticket-agent had told me.
[p. 17:]
The door of the Marsh retail office was open, and I walked in with considerableexpectancy. The interior was shabby and ill-lighted, but contained a large number of display casesof solid and capable workmanship. A youngish man came forward to meet me, and as I studied his facea fresh wave of disturbance passed over me. He was not unhandsome, but there was something subtlybizarre and aberrant about his features and vocal timbre. I could not stifle a keen suddenaversion, and acquired an unexplained reluctance to seem like any sort of curious investigator.Before I knew it I found myself telling the fellow that I was a jewellery buyer for a Clevelandfirm, and preparing myself to shew a merely professional interest in what I should see.
It was hard, though, to carry out this policy. The clerk switched on more lightsand began to lead me from case to case, but when I beheld the glittering marvels before me I couldscarcely walk steadily or talk coherently. It took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to makeone literally gasp at the strange, alien loveliness of these opulent objects, and as I gazedfascinatedly I saw how little justice even the colour-plates had done them. Even now I can hardlydescribe what I saw—though those who own such pieces or have seen them in shops and museumscan supply the missing data. The massed effect of so many elaborate examples was what produced myespecial feeling of awe and unrest. For somehow or other, these singular grotesques and arabesquesdid not seem to be the product of any earthly handiwork—least of all a factory only astone’s throw away. The patterns and traceries all hinted of remote spaces and unimaginableabysses, and the aquatic nature of the occasional pictorial items added to the generalunearthliness. Some of the fabulous monsters filled me with an uncomfortable sense of darkpseudo-memory which I tried
[p. 21:]
the taint and blasphemy of furtive Innsmouth. He, like me, was a normal being outside the pall ofdecay and normally terrified by it. But because he was so inextricably close to the thing, he hadbeen broken in a way that I was not yet broken.
Shaking off the hands of the firemen who sought to detain him, the ancient rose tohis feet and greeted me as if I were an acquaintance. The grocery youth had told me where most ofUncle Zadok’s liquor was obtained, and without a word I began leading him in thatdirection—through the Square and around into Eliot Street. His step was astonishingly briskfor one of his age and bibulousness, and I marvelled at the original strength of his constitution.My haste to leave Innsmouth had abated for the moment, and I felt instead a queer curiosity to dipinto this mumbling patriarch’s chaotic store of extravagant myth.
When we had brought a quart of whiskey in the rear of a dismal variety store, Iled Uncle Zadok along South Street to the utterly abandoned section of the waterfront, and stillfarther southward to a point where even the fishermen on the distant breakwater could not see us,where I knew we could talk undisturbed. For some reason or other he seemed to dislike thisarrangement—casting nervous glances out to sea in the direction of Devil Reef—but thelure of the whiskey was too strong for him to resist. After we had found a seat on the edge of arotting wharf I gave him a pull at the bottle and waited for it to take effect. Naturally Igraduated the doses very carefully, for I did not wish the old man’s loquacity to turn into astupor. As he grew more mellow, I began to venture some remarks and inquiries about Innsmouth, andwas really startled by the terrible and sincere portentousness of his lowered voice. He did notseem as crazy as his wild tales would indicate, and I found myself shuddering even when I could notbelieve his fantastic inventions. I hardly wondered at the naive credulity of superstitious FatherIwanicki.
