I.

Life is a hideous thing, and from the background behind what we know of it peer daemoniacalhints of truth which make it sometimes a thousandfold more hideous. Science, already oppressivewith its shocking revelations, will perhaps be the ultimate exterminator of our human species—ifseparate species we be—for its reserve of unguessed horrors could never be borne by mortalbrains if loosed upon the world. If we knew what we are, we should do as Sir Arthur Jermyn did;and Arthur Jermyn soaked himself in oil and set fire to his clothing one night. No one placedthe charred fragments in an urn or set a memorial to him who had been; for certain papers anda certain boxed object were found, which made men wish to forget. Some who knew him donot admit that he ever existed.
Arthur Jermyn went out on the moor and burned himself after seeing the boxedobject which had come from Africa. It was this object, and not his peculiar personalappearance, which made him end his life. Many would have disliked to live if possessed of thepeculiar features of Arthur Jermyn, but he had been a poet and scholar and had not minded. Learningwas in his blood, for his great-grandfather, Sir Robert Jermyn, Bt., had been an anthropologistof note, whilst his great-great-great-grandfather, Sir Wade Jermyn, was one of the earliestexplorers of the Congo region, and had written eruditely of its tribes, animals, and supposedantiquities. Indeed, old Sir Wade had possessed an intellectual zeal amounting almost to a mania;his bizarre conjectures on a prehistoric white Congolese civilisation earning him much ridiculewhen his book, Observations on the Several Parts of Africa, was published. In 1765 thisfearless explorer had been placed in a madhouse at Huntingdon.
Madness was in all the Jermyns, and people were glad there were not many ofthem. The line put forth no branches, and Arthur was the last of it. If he had not been, onecannot say what he would have done when the object came. The Jermyns never seemed tolook quite right—something was amiss, though Arthur was the worst, and the old familyportraits in Jermyn House shewed fine faces enough before Sir Wade’s time. Certainly,the madness began with Sir Wade, whose wild stories of Africa were at once the delight and terrorof his few friends. It shewed in his collection of trophies and specimens, which were not suchas a normal man would accumulate and preserve, and appeared strikingly in the Oriental seclusionin which he kept his wife. The latter, he had said, was the daughter of a Portuguese traderwhom he had met in Africa; and did not like English ways. She, with an infant son born in Africa,had accompanied him back from the second and longest of his trips, and had gone with him on thethird and last, never returning. No one had ever seen her closely, not even the servants; forher disposition had been violent and singular. During her brief stay at Jermyn House she occupieda remote wing, and was waited on by her husband alone. Sir Wade was, indeed, most peculiar inhis solicitude for his family; for when he returned to Africa he would permit no one to carefor his young son save a loathsome black woman from Guinea. Upon coming back, after the deathof Lady Jermyn, he himself assumed complete care of the boy.
But it was the talk of Sir Wade, especially when in his cups, which chieflyled his friends to deem him mad. In a rational age like the eighteenth century it was unwisefor a man of learning to talk about wild sights and strange scenes under a Congo moon; of thegigantic walls and pillars of a forgotten city, crumbling and vine-grown, and of damp, silent,stone steps leading interminably down into the darkness of abysmal treasure-vaults and inconceivablecatacombs. Especially was it unwise to rave of the living things that might haunt such a place;of creatures half of the jungle and half of the impiously aged city—fabulous creatureswhich even a Pliny might describe with scepticism; things that might have sprung up after thegreat apes had overrun the dying city with the walls and the pillars, the vaults and the weirdcarvings. Yet after he came home for the last time Sir Wade would speak of such matters witha shudderingly uncanny zest, mostly after his third glass at the Knight’s Head; boastingof what he had found in the jungle and of how he had dwelt among terrible ruins known only tohim. And finally he had spoken of the living things in such a manner that he was taken to themadhouse. He had shewn little regret when shut into the barred room at Huntingdon, for his mindmoved curiously. Ever since his son had commenced to grow out of infancy he had liked his homeless and less, till at last he had seemed to dread it. The Knight’s Head had been hisheadquarters, and when he was confined he expressed some vague gratitude as if for protection.Three years later he died.
Wade Jermyn’s son Philip was a highly peculiar person. Despite a strongphysical resemblance to his father, his appearance and conduct were in many particulars so coarsethat he was universally shunned. Though he did not inherit the madness which was feared by some,he was densely stupid and given to brief periods of uncontrollable violence. In frame he wassmall, but intensely powerful, and was of incredible agility. Twelve years after succeedingto his title he married the daughter of his gamekeeper, a person said to be of gypsy extraction,but before his son was born joined the navy as a common sailor, completing the general disgustwhich his habits and mesalliance had begun. After the close of the American war he was heardof as a sailor on a merchantman in the African trade, having a kind of reputation for featsof strength and climbing, but finally disappearing one night as his ship lay off the Congo coast.
In the son of Sir Philip Jermyn the now accepted family peculiarity took astrange and fatal turn. Tall and fairly handsome, with a sort of weird Eastern grace despitecertain slight oddities of proportion, Robert Jermyn began life as a scholar and investigator.It was he who first studied scientifically the vast collection of relics which his mad grandfatherhad brought from Africa, and who made the family name as celebrated in ethnology as in exploration.In 1815 Sir Robert married a daughter of the seventh Viscount Brightholme and was subsequentlyblessed with three children, the eldest and youngest of whom were never publicly seen on accountof deformities in mind and body. Saddened by these family misfortunes, the scientist soughtrelief in work, and made two long expeditions in the interior of Africa. In 1849 his secondson, Nevil, a singularly repellent person who seemed to combine the surliness of Philip Jermynwith the hauteur of the Brightholmes, ran away with a vulgar dancer, but was pardoned upon hisreturn in the following year. He came back to Jermyn House a widower with an infant son, Alfred,who was one day to be the father of Arthur Jermyn.
Friends said that it was this series of griefs which unhinged the mind of SirRobert Jermyn, yet it was probably merely a bit of African folklore which caused the disaster.The elderly scholar had been collecting legends of the Onga tribes near the field of his grandfather’sand his own explorations, hoping in some way to account for Sir Wade’s wild tales of alost city peopled by strange hybrid creatures. A certain consistency in the strange papers ofhis ancestor suggested that the madman’s imagination might have been stimulated by nativemyths. On October 19, 1852, the explorer Samuel Seaton called at Jermyn House with a manuscriptof notes collected among the Ongas, believing that certain legends of a grey city of white apesruled by a white god might prove valuable to the ethnologist. In his conversation he probablysupplied many additional details; the nature of which will never be known, since a hideous seriesof tragedies suddenly burst into being. When Sir Robert Jermyn emerged from his library he leftbehind the strangled corpse of the explorer, and before he could be restrained, had put an endto all three of his children; the two who were never seen, and the son who had run away. NevilJermyn died in the successful defence of his own two-year-old son, who had apparently been includedin the old man’s madly murderous scheme. Sir Robert himself, after repeated attempts atsuicide and a stubborn refusal to utter any articulate sound, died of apoplexy in the secondyear of his confinement.
Sir Alfred Jermyn was a baronet before his fourth birthday, but his tastesnever matched his title. At twenty he had joined a band of music-hall performers, and at thirty-sixhad deserted his wife and child to travel with an itinerant American circus. His end was veryrevolting. Among the animals in the exhibition with which he travelled was a huge bull gorillaof lighter colour than the average; a surprisingly tractable beast of much popularity with theperformers. With this gorilla Alfred Jermyn was singularly fascinated, and on many occasionsthe two would eye each other for long periods through the intervening bars. Eventually Jermynasked and obtained permission to train the animal, astonishing audiences and fellow-performersalike with his success. One morning in Chicago, as the gorilla and Alfred Jermyn were rehearsingan exceedingly clever boxing match, the former delivered a blow of more than usual force, hurtingboth the body and dignity of the amateur trainer. Of what followed, members of “The GreatestShow on Earth” do not like to speak. They did not expect to hear Sir Alfred Jermyn emita shrill, inhuman scream, or to see him seize his clumsy antagonist with both hands, dash itto the floor of the cage, and bite fiendishly at its hairy throat. The gorilla was off its guard,but not for long, and before anything could be done by the regular trainer the body which hadbelonged to a baronet was past recognition.

II.

Arthur Jermyn was the son of Sir Alfred Jermyn and a music-hall singer of unknownorigin. When the husband and father deserted his family, the mother took the child to JermynHouse; where there was none left to object to her presence. She was not without notions of whata nobleman’s dignity should be, and saw to it that her son received the best educationwhich limited money could provide. The family resources were now sadly slender, and Jermyn Househad fallen into woeful disrepair, but young Arthur loved the old edifice and all its contents.He was not like any other Jermyn who had ever lived, for he was a poet and a dreamer. Some ofthe neighbouring families who had heard tales of old Sir Wade Jermyn’s unseen Portuguesewife declared that her Latin blood must be shewing itself; but most persons merely sneered athis sensitiveness to beauty, attributing it to his music-hall mother, who was socially unrecognised.The poetic delicacy of Arthur Jermyn was the more remarkable because of his uncouth personalappearance. Most of the Jermyns had possessed a subtly odd and repellent cast, but Arthur’scase was very striking. It is hard to say just what he resembled, but his expression, his facialangle, and the length of his arms gave a thrill of repulsion to those who met him for the firsttime.
It was the mind and character of Arthur Jermyn which atoned for his aspect.Gifted and learned, he took highest honours at Oxford and seemed likely to redeem the intellectualfame of his family. Though of poetic rather than scientific temperament, he planned to continuethe work of his forefathers in African ethnology and antiquities, utilising the truly wonderfulthough strange collection of Sir Wade. With his fanciful mind he thought often of the prehistoriccivilisation in which the mad explorer had so implicitly believed, and would weave tale aftertale about the silent jungle city mentioned in the latter’s wilder notes and paragraphs.For the nebulous utterances concerning a nameless, unsuspected race of jungle hybrids he hada peculiar feeling of mingled terror and attraction; speculating on the possible basis of sucha fancy, and seeking to obtain light among the more recent data gleaned by his great-grandfatherand Samuel Seaton amongst the Ongas.
In 1911, after the death of his mother, Sir Arthur Jermyn determined to pursuehis investigations to the utmost extent. Selling a portion of his estate to obtain the requisitemoney, he outfitted an expedition and sailed for the Congo. Arranging with the Belgian authoritiesfor a party of guides, he spent a year in the Onga and Kaliri country, finding data beyond thehighest of his expectations. Among the Kaliris was an aged chief called Mwanu, who possessednot only a highly retentive memory, but a singular degree of intelligence and interest in oldlegends. This ancient confirmed every tale which Jermyn had heard, adding his own account ofthe stone city and the white apes as it had been told to him.
According to Mwanu, the grey city and the hybrid creatures were no more, havingbeen annihilated by the warlike N’bangus many years ago. This tribe, after destroyingmost of the edifices and killing the live beings, had carried off the stuffed goddess whichhad been the object of their quest; the white ape-goddess which the strange beings worshipped,and which was held by Congo tradition to be the form of one who had reigned as a princess amongthose beings. Just what the white ape-like creatures could have been, Mwanu had no idea, buthe thought they were the builders of the ruined city. Jermyn could form no conjecture, but byclose questioning obtained a very picturesque legend of the stuffed goddess.
The ape-princess, it was said, became the consort of a great white god whohad come out of the West. For a long time they had reigned over the city together, but whenthey had a son all three went away. Later the god and the princess had returned, and upon thedeath of the princess her divine husband had mummified the body and enshrined it in a vast houseof stone, where it was worshipped. Then he had departed alone. The legend here seemed to presentthree variants. According to one story nothing further happened save that the stuffed goddessbecame a symbol of supremacy for whatever tribe might possess it. It was for this reason thatthe N’bangus carried it off. A second story told of the god’s return and death atthe feet of his enshrined wife. A third told of the return of the son, grown to manhood—orapehood or godhood, as the case might be—yet unconscious of his identity. Surely the imaginativeblacks had made the most of whatever events might lie behind the extravagant legendry.
Of the reality of the jungle city described by old Sir Wade, Arthur Jermynhad no further doubt; and was hardly astonished when early in 1912 he came upon what was leftof it. Its size must have been exaggerated, yet the stones lying about proved that it was nomere negro village. Unfortunately no carvings could be found, and the small size of the expeditionprevented operations toward clearing the one visible passageway that seemed to lead down intothe system of vaults which Sir Wade had mentioned. The white apes and the stuffed goddess werediscussed with all the native chiefs of the region, but it remained for a European to improveon the data offered by old Mwanu. M. Verhaeren, Belgian agent at a trading-post on the Congo,believed that he could not only locate but obtain the stuffed goddess, of which he had vaguelyheard; since the once mighty N’bangus were now the submissive servants of King Albert’sgovernment, and with but little persuasion could be induced to part with the gruesome deitythey had carried off. When Jermyn sailed for England, therefore, it was with the exultant probabilitythat he would within a few months receive a priceless ethnological relic confirming the wildestof his great-great-great-grandfather’s narratives—that is, the wildest which hehad ever heard. Countrymen near Jermyn House had perhaps heard wilder tales handed down fromancestors who had listened to Sir Wade around the tables of the Knight’s Head.
Arthur Jermyn waited very patiently for the expected box from M. Verhaeren,meanwhile studying with increased diligence the manuscripts left by his mad ancestor. He beganto feel closely akin to Sir Wade, and to seek relics of the latter’s personal life inEngland as well as of his African exploits. Oral accounts of the mysterious and secluded wifehad been numerous, but no tangible relic of her stay at Jermyn House remained. Jermyn wonderedwhat circumstance had prompted or permitted such an effacement, and decided that the husband’sinsanity was the prime cause. His great-great-great-grandmother, he recalled, was said to havebeen the daughter of a Portuguese trader in Africa. No doubt her practical heritage and superficialknowledge of the Dark Continent had caused her to flout Sir Wade’s talk of the interior,a thing which such a man would not be likely to forgive. She had died in Africa, perhaps draggedthither by a husband determined to prove what he had told. But as Jermyn indulged in these reflectionshe could not but smile at their futility, a century and a half after the death of both of hisstrange progenitors.
In June, 1913, a letter arrived from M. Verhaeren, telling of the finding ofthe stuffed goddess. It was, the Belgian averred, a most extraordinary object; an object quitebeyond the power of a layman to classify. Whether it was human or simian only a scientist coulddetermine, and the process of determination would be greatly hampered by its imperfect condition.Time and the Congo climate are not kind to mummies; especially when their preparation is asamateurish as seemed to be the case here. Around the creature’s neck had been found agolden chain bearing an empty locket on which were armorial designs; no doubt some hapless traveller’skeepsake, taken by the N’bangus and hung upon the goddess as a charm. In commenting onthe contour of the mummy’s face, M. Verhaeren suggested a whimsical comparison; or rather,expressed a humorous wonder just how it would strike his correspondent, but was too much interestedscientifically to waste many words in levity. The stuffed goddess, he wrote, would arrive dulypacked about a month after receipt of the letter.
The boxed object was delivered at Jermyn House on the afternoon of August 3,1913, being conveyed immediately to the large chamber which housed the collection of Africanspecimens as arranged by Sir Robert and Arthur. What ensued can best be gathered from the talesof servants and from things and papers later examined. Of the various tales that of aged Soames,the family butler, is most ample and coherent. According to this trustworthy man, Sir ArthurJermyn dismissed everyone from the room before opening the box, though the instant sound ofhammer and chisel shewed that he did not delay the operation. Nothing was heard for some time;just how long Soames cannot exactly estimate; but it was certainly less than a quarter of anhour later that the horrible scream, undoubtedly in Jermyn’s voice, was heard. Immediatelyafterward Jermyn emerged from the room, rushing frantically toward the front of the house asif pursued by some hideous enemy. The expression on his face, a face ghastly enough in repose,was beyond description. When near the front door he seemed to think of something, and turnedback in his flight, finally disappearing down the stairs to the cellar. The servants were utterlydumbfounded, and watched at the head of the stairs, but their master did not return. A smellof oil was all that came up from the regions below. After dark a rattling was heard at the doorleading from the cellar into the courtyard; and a stable-boy saw Arthur Jermyn, glistening fromhead to foot with oil and redolent of that fluid, steal furtively out and vanish on the blackmoor surrounding the house. Then, in an exaltation of supreme horror, everyone saw the end.A spark appeared on the moor, a flame arose, and a pillar of human fire reached to the heavens.The house of Jermyn no longer existed.
The reason why Arthur Jermyn’s charred fragments were not collected andburied lies in what was found afterward, principally the thing in the box. The stuffed goddesswas a nauseous sight, withered and eaten away, but it was clearly a mummified white ape of someunknown species, less hairy than any recorded variety, and infinitely nearer mankind—quiteshockingly so. Detailed description would be rather unpleasant, but two salient particularsmust be told, for they fit in revoltingly with certain notes of Sir Wade Jermyn’s Africanexpeditions and with the Congolese legends of the white god and the ape-princess. The two particularsin question are these: the arms on the golden locket about the creature’s neck were theJermyn arms, and the jocose suggestion of M. Verhaeren about a certain resemblance as connectedwith the shrivelled face applied with vivid, ghastly, and unnatural horror to none other thanthe sensitive Arthur Jermyn, great-great-great-grandson of Sir Wade Jermyn and an unknown wife.Members of the Royal Anthropological Institute burned the thing and threw the locket into awell, and some of them do not admit that Arthur Jermyn ever existed.
