I. From the Dark

Of Herbert West, who was my friend in college and in after life, I can speak only with extremeterror. This terror is not due altogether to the sinister manner of his recent disappearance,but was engendered by the whole nature of his life-work, and first gained its acute form morethan seventeen years ago, when we were in the third year of our course at the Miskatonic UniversityMedical School in Arkham. While he was with me, the wonder and diabolism of his experimentsfascinated me utterly, and I was his closest companion. Now that he is gone and the spell isbroken, the actual fear is greater. Memories and possibilities are ever more hideous than realities.
The first horrible incident of our acquaintance was the greatest shock I everexperienced, and it is only with reluctance that I repeat it. As I have said, it happened whenwe were in the medical school, where West had already made himself notorious through his wildtheories on the nature of death and the possibility of overcoming it artificially. His views,which were widely ridiculed by the faculty and his fellow-students, hinged on the essentiallymechanistic nature of life; and concerned means for operating the organic machinery of mankindby calculated chemical action after the failure of natural processes. In his experiments withvarious animating solutions he had killed and treated immense numbers of rabbits, guinea-pigs,cats, dogs, and monkeys, till he had become the prime nuisance of the college. Several timeshe had actually obtained signs of life in animals supposedly dead; in many cases violent signs;but he soon saw that the perfection of this process, if indeed possible, would necessarily involvea lifetime of research. It likewise became clear that, since the same solution never workedalike on different organic species, he would require human subjects for further and more specialisedprogress. It was here that he first came into conflict with the college authorities, and wasdebarred from future experiments by no less a dignitary than the dean of the medical schoolhimself—the learned and benevolent Dr. Allan Halsey, whose work in behalf of the strickenis recalled by every old resident of Arkham.
I had always been exceptionally tolerant of West’s pursuits, and we frequentlydiscussed his theories, whose ramifications and corollaries were almost infinite. Holding withHaeckel that all life is a chemical and physical process, and that the so-called “soul”is a myth, my friend believed that artificial reanimation of the dead can depend only on thecondition of the tissues; and that unless actual decomposition has set in, a corpse fully equippedwith organs may with suitable measures be set going again in the peculiar fashion known as life.That the psychic or intellectual life might be impaired by the slight deterioration of sensitivebrain-cells which even a short period of death would be apt to cause, West fully realised. Ithad at first been his hope to find a reagent which would restore vitality before the actualadvent of death, and only repeated failures on animals had shewn him that the natural and artificiallife-motions were incompatible. He then sought extreme freshness in his specimens, injectinghis solutions into the blood immediately after the extinction of life. It was this circumstancewhich made the professors so carelessly sceptical, for they felt that true death had not occurredin any case. They did not stop to view the matter closely and reasoningly.
It was not long after the faculty had interdicted his work that West confidedto me his resolution to get fresh human bodies in some manner, and continue in secret the experimentshe could no longer perform openly. To hear him discussing ways and means was rather ghastly,for at the college we had never procured anatomical specimens ourselves. Whenever the morgueproved inadequate, two local negroes attended to this matter, and they were seldom questioned.West was then a small, slender, spectacled youth with delicate features, yellow hair, pale blueeyes, and a soft voice, and it was uncanny to hear him dwelling on the relative merits of ChristchurchCemetery and the potter’s field. We finally decided on the potter’s field, becausepractically every body in Christchurch was embalmed; a thing of course ruinous to West’sresearches.
I was by this time his active and enthralled assistant, and helped him makeall his decisions, not only concerning the source of bodies but concerning a suitable placefor our loathsome work. It was I who thought of the deserted Chapman farmhouse beyond MeadowHill, where we fitted up on the ground floor an operating room and a laboratory, each with darkcurtains to conceal our midnight doings. The place was far from any road, and in sight of noother house, yet precautions were none the less necessary; since rumours of strange lights,started by chance nocturnal roamers, would soon bring disaster on our enterprise. It was agreedto call the whole thing a chemical laboratory if discovery should occur. Gradually we equippedour sinister haunt of science with materials either purchased in Boston or quietly borrowedfrom the college—materials carefully made unrecognisable save to expert eyes—andprovided spades and picks for the many burials we should have to make in the cellar. At thecollege we used an incinerator, but the apparatus was too costly for our unauthorised laboratory.Bodies were always a nuisance—even the small guinea-pig bodies from the slight clandestineexperiments in West’s room at the boarding-house.
We followed the local death-notices like ghouls, for our specimens demandedparticular qualities. What we wanted were corpses interred soon after death and without artificialpreservation; preferably free from malforming disease, and certainly with all organs present.Accident victims were our best hope. Not for many weeks did we hear of anything suitable; thoughwe talked with morgue and hospital authorities, ostensibly in the college’s interest,as often as we could without exciting suspicion. We found that the college had first choicein every case, so that it might be necessary to remain in Arkham during the summer, when onlythe limited summer-school classes were held. In the end, though, luck favoured us; for one daywe heard of an almost ideal case in the potter’s field; a brawny young workman drownedonly the morning before in Sumner’s Pond, and buried at the town’s expense withoutdelay or embalming. That afternoon we found the new grave, and determined to begin work soonafter midnight.
It was a repulsive task that we undertook in the black small hours, even thoughwe lacked at that time the special horror of graveyards which later experiences brought to us.We carried spades and oil dark lanterns, for although electric torches were then manufactured,they were not as satisfactory as the tungsten contrivances of today. The process of unearthingwas slow and sordid—it might have been gruesomely poetical if we had been artists insteadof scientists—and we were glad when our spades struck wood. When the pine box was fullyuncovered West scrambled down and removed the lid, dragging out and propping up the contents.I reached down and hauled the contents out of the grave, and then both toiled hard to restorethe spot to its former appearance. The affair made us rather nervous, especially the stiff formand vacant face of our first trophy, but we managed to remove all traces of our visit. Whenwe had patted down the last shovelful of earth we put the specimen in a canvas sack and setout for the old Chapman place beyond Meadow Hill.
On an improvised dissecting-table in the old farmhouse, by the light of a powerfulacetylene lamp, the specimen was not very spectral looking. It had been a sturdy and apparentlyunimaginative youth of wholesome plebeian type—large-framed, grey-eyed, and brown-haired—asound animal without psychological subtleties, and probably having vital processes of the simplestand healthiest sort. Now, with the eyes closed, it looked more asleep than dead; though theexpert test of my friend soon left no doubt on that score. We had at last what West had alwayslonged for—a real dead man of the ideal kind, ready for the solution as prepared accordingto the most careful calculations and theories for human use. The tension on our part becamevery great. We knew that there was scarcely a chance for anything like complete success, andcould not avoid hideous fears at possible grotesque results of partial animation. Especiallywere we apprehensive concerning the mind and impulses of the creature, since in the space followingdeath some of the more delicate cerebral cells might well have suffered deterioration. I, myself,still held some curious notions about the traditional “soul” of man, and felt anawe at the secrets that might be told by one returning from the dead. I wondered what sightsthis placid youth might have seen in inaccessible spheres, and what he could relate if fullyrestored to life. But my wonder was not overwhelming, since for the most part I shared the materialismof my friend. He was calmer than I as he forced a large quantity of his fluid into a vein ofthe body’s arm, immediately binding the incision securely.
The waiting was gruesome, but West never faltered. Every now and then he appliedhis stethoscope to the specimen, and bore the negative results philosophically. After aboutthree-quarters of an hour without the least sign of life he disappointedly pronounced the solutioninadequate, but determined to make the most of his opportunity and try one change in the formulabefore disposing of his ghastly prize. We had that afternoon dug a grave in the cellar, andwould have to fill it by dawn—for although we had fixed a lock on the house we wishedto shun even the remotest risk of a ghoulish discovery. Besides, the body would not be even approximatelyfresh the next night. So taking the solitary acetylene lamp into the adjacent laboratory, weleft our silent guest on the slab in the dark, and bent every energy to the mixing of a newsolution; the weighing and measuring supervised by West with an almost fanatical care.
The awful event was very sudden, and wholly unexpected. I was pouring somethingfrom one test-tube to another, and West was busy over the alcohol blast-lamp which had to answerfor a Bunsen burner in this gasless edifice, when from the pitch-black room we had left thereburst the most appalling and daemoniac succession of cries that either of us had ever heard.Not more unutterable could have been the chaos of hellish sound if the pit itself had openedto release the agony of the damned, for in one inconceivable cacophony was centred all the supernalterror and unnatural despair of animate nature. Human it could not have been—it is notin man to make such sounds—and without a thought of our late employment or its possiblediscovery both West and I leaped to the nearest window like stricken animals; overturning tubes,lamp, and retorts, and vaulting madly into the starred abyss of the rural night. I think wescreamed ourselves as we stumbled frantically toward the town, though as we reached the outskirtswe put on a semblance of restraint—just enough to seem like belated revellers staggeringhome from a debauch.
We did not separate, but managed to get to West’s room, where we whisperedwith the gas up until dawn. By then we had calmed ourselves a little with rational theoriesand plans for investigation, so that we could sleep through the day—classes being disregarded.But that evening two items in the paper, wholly unrelated, made it again impossible for us tosleep. The old deserted Chapman house had inexplicably burned to an amorphous heap of ashes;that we could understand because of the upset lamp. Also, an attempt had been made to disturba new grave in the potter’s field, as if by futile and spadeless clawing at the earth.That we could not understand, for we had patted down the mould very carefully.
And for seventeen years after that West would look frequently over his shoulder,and complain of fancied footsteps behind him. Now he has disappeared.

II. The Plague-Daemon

I shall never forget that hideous summer sixteen years ago, when like a noxious afrite fromthe halls of Eblis typhoid stalked leeringly through Arkham. It is by that satanic scourge thatmost recall the year, for truly terror brooded with bat-wings over the piles of coffins in thetombs of Christchurch Cemetery; yet for me there is a greater horror in that time—a horrorknown to me alone now that Herbert West has disappeared.
West and I were doing post-graduate work in summer classes at the medical schoolof Miskatonic University, and my friend had attained a wide notoriety because of his experimentsleading toward the revivification of the dead. After the scientific slaughter of uncounted smallanimals the freakish work had ostensibly stopped by order of our sceptical dean, Dr. Allan Halsey;though West had continued to perform certain secret tests in his dingy boarding-house room,and had on one terrible and unforgettable occasion taken a human body from its grave in thepotter’s field to a deserted farmhouse beyond Meadow Hill.
I was with him on that odious occasion, and saw him inject into the still veinsthe elixir which he thought would to some extent restore life’s chemical and physicalprocesses. It had ended horribly—in a delirium of fear which we gradually came to attributeto our own overwrought nerves—and West had never afterward been able to shake off a maddeningsensation of being haunted and hunted. The body had not been quite fresh enough; it is obviousthat to restore normal mental attributes a body must be very fresh indeed; and a burning ofthe old house had prevented us from burying the thing. It would have been better if we couldhave known it was underground.
After that experience West had dropped his researches for some time; but asthe zeal of the born scientist slowly returned, he again became importunate with the collegefaculty, pleading for the use of the dissecting-room and of fresh human specimens for the workhe regarded as so overwhelmingly important. His pleas, however, were wholly in vain; for thedecision of Dr. Halsey was inflexible, and the other professors all endorsed the verdict oftheir leader. In the radical theory of reanimation they saw nothing but the immature vagariesof a youthful enthusiast whose slight form, yellow hair, spectacled blue eyes, and soft voicegave no hint of the supernormal—almost diabolical—power of the cold brain within.I can see him now as he was then—and I shiver. He grew sterner of face, but never elderly.And now Sefton Asylum has had the mishap and West has vanished.
West clashed disagreeably with Dr. Halsey near the end of our last undergraduateterm in a wordy dispute that did less credit to him than to the kindly dean in point of courtesy.He felt that he was needlessly and irrationally retarded in a supremely great work; a work whichhe could of course conduct to suit himself in later years, but which he wished to begin whilestill possessed of the exceptional facilities of the university. That the tradition-bound eldersshould ignore his singular results on animals, and persist in their denial of the possibilityof reanimation, was inexpressibly disgusting and almost incomprehensible to a youth of West’slogical temperament. Only greater maturity could help him understand the chronic mental limitationsof the “professor-doctor” type—the product of generations of pathetic Puritanism;kindly, conscientious, and sometimes gentle and amiable, yet always narrow, intolerant, custom-ridden,and lacking in perspective. Age has more charity for these incomplete yet high-souled characters,whose worst real vice is timidity, and who are ultimately punished by general ridicule for theirintellectual sins—sins like Ptolemaism, Calvinism, anti-Darwinism, anti-Nietzscheism,and every sort of Sabbatarianism and sumptuary legislation. West, young despite his marvellousscientific acquirements, had scant patience with good Dr. Halsey and his erudite colleagues;and nursed an increasing resentment, coupled with a desire to prove his theories to these obtuseworthies in some striking and dramatic fashion. Like most youths, he indulged in elaborate day-dreamsof revenge, triumph, and final magnanimous forgiveness.
And then had come the scourge, grinning and lethal, from the nightmare cavernsof Tartarus. West and I had graduated about the time of its beginning, but had remained foradditional work at the summer school, so that we were in Arkham when it broke with full daemoniacfury upon the town. Though not as yet licenced physicians, we now had our degrees, and werepressed frantically into public service as the numbers of the stricken grew. The situation wasalmost past management, and deaths ensued too frequently for the local undertakers fully tohandle. Burials without embalming were made in rapid succession, and even the Christchurch Cemeteryreceiving tomb was crammed with coffins of the unembalmed dead. This circumstance was not withouteffect on West, who thought often of the irony of the situation—so many fresh specimens,yet none for his persecuted researches! We were frightfully overworked, and the terrific mentaland nervous strain made my friend brood morbidly.
But West’s gentle enemies were no less harassed with prostrating duties.College had all but closed, and every doctor of the medical faculty was helping to fight thetyphoid plague. Dr. Halsey in particular had distinguished himself in sacrificing service, applyinghis extreme skill with whole-hearted energy to cases which many others shunned because of dangeror apparent hopelessness. Before a month was over the fearless dean had become a popular hero,though he seemed unconscious of his fame as he struggled to keep from collapsing with physicalfatigue and nervous exhaustion. West could not withhold admiration for the fortitude of hisfoe, but because of this was even more determined to prove to him the truth of his amazing doctrines.Taking advantage of the disorganisation of both college work and municipal health regulations,he managed to get a recently deceased body smuggled into the university dissecting-room onenight, and in my presence injected a new modification of his solution. The thing actually openedits eyes, but only stared at the ceiling with a look of soul-petrifying horror before collapsinginto an inertness from which nothing could rouse it. West said it was not fresh enough—thehot summer air does not favour corpses. That time we were almost caught before we incineratedthe thing, and West doubted the advisability of repeating his daring misuse of the college laboratory.
The peak of the epidemic was reached in August. West and I were almost dead,and Dr. Halsey did die on the 14th. The students all attended the hasty funeral on the 15th,and bought an impressive wreath, though the latter was quite overshadowed by the tributes sentby wealthy Arkham citizens and by the municipality itself. It was almost a public affair, forthe dean had surely been a public benefactor. After the entombment we were all somewhat depressed,and spent the afternoon at the bar of the Commercial House; where West, though shaken by thedeath of his chief opponent, chilled the rest of us with references to his notorious theories.Most of the students went home, or to various duties, as the evening advanced; but West persuadedme to aid him in “making a night of it”. West’s landlady saw us arrive athis room about two in the morning, with a third man between us; and told her husband that wehad all evidently dined and wined rather well.
Apparently this acidulous matron was right; for about 3 a.m. the whole housewas aroused by cries coming from West’s room, where when they broke down the door theyfound the two of us unconscious on the blood-stained carpet, beaten, scratched, and mauled,and with the broken remnants of West’s bottles and instruments around us. Only an openwindow told what had become of our assailant, and many wondered how he himself had fared afterthe terrific leap from the second story to the lawn which he must have made. There were somestrange garments in the room, but West upon regaining consciousness said they did not belongto the stranger, but were specimens collected for bacteriological analysis in the course ofinvestigations on the transmission of germ diseases. He ordered them burnt as soon as possiblein the capacious fireplace. To the police we both declared ignorance of our late companion’sidentity. He was, West nervously said, a congenial stranger whom we had met at some downtownbar of uncertain location. We had all been rather jovial, and West and I did not wish to haveour pugnacious companion hunted down.
That same night saw the beginning of the second Arkham horror—the horrorthat to me eclipsed the plague itself. Christchurch Cemetery was the scene of a terrible killing;a watchman having been clawed to death in a manner not only too hideous for description, butraising a doubt as to the human agency of the deed. The victim had been seen alive considerablyafter midnight—the dawn revealed the unutterable thing. The manager of a circus at theneighbouring town of Bolton was questioned, but he swore that no beast had at any time escapedfrom its cage. Those who found the body noted a trail of blood leading to the receiving tomb,where a small pool of red lay on the concrete just outside the gate. A fainter trail led awaytoward the woods, but it soon gave out.
The next night devils danced on the roofs of Arkham, and unnatural madnesshowled in the wind. Through the fevered town had crept a curse which some said was greater thanthe plague, and which some whispered was the embodied daemon-soul of the plague itself. Eighthouses were entered by a nameless thing which strewed red death in its wake—in all, seventeenmaimed and shapeless remnants of bodies were left behind by the voiceless, sadistic monsterthat crept abroad. A few persons had half seen it in the dark, and said it was white and likea malformed ape or anthropomorphic fiend. It had not left behind quite all that it had attacked,for sometimes it had been hungry. The number it had killed was fourteen; three of the bodieshad been in stricken homes and had not been alive.
On the third night frantic bands of searchers, led by the police, capturedit in a house on Crane Street near the Miskatonic campus. They had organised the quest withcare, keeping in touch by means of volunteer telephone stations, and when someone in the collegedistrict had reported hearing a scratching at a shuttered window, the net was quickly spread.On account of the general alarm and precautions, there were only two more victims, and the capturewas effected without major casualties. The thing was finally stopped by a bullet, though nota fatal one, and was rushed to the local hospital amidst universal excitement and loathing.
For it had been a man. This much was clear despite the nauseous eyes, the voicelesssimianism, and the daemoniac savagery. They dressed its wound and carted it to the asylum atSefton, where it beat its head against the walls of a padded cell for sixteen years—untilthe recent mishap, when it escaped under circumstances that few like to mention. What had mostdisgusted the searchers of Arkham was the thing they noticed when the monster’s face wascleaned—the mocking, unbelievable resemblance to a learned and self-sacrificing martyrwho had been entombed but three days before—the late Dr. Allan Halsey, public benefactorand dean of the medical school of Miskatonic University.
To the vanished Herbert West and to me the disgust and horror were supreme.I shudder tonight as I think of it; shudder even more than I did that morning when West mutteredthrough his bandages,
“Damn it, it wasn’t quite fresh enough!”

III. Six Shots by Midnight

It is uncommon to fire all six shots of a revolver with great suddenness when one would probablybe sufficient, but many things in the life of Herbert West were uncommon. It is, for instance,not often that a young physician leaving college is obliged to conceal the principles whichguide his selection of a home and office, yet that was the case with Herbert West. When he andI obtained our degrees at the medical school of Miskatonic University, and sought to relieveour poverty by setting up as general practitioners, we took great care not to say that we choseour house because it was fairly well isolated, and as near as possible to the potter’sfield.
Reticence such as this is seldom without a cause, nor indeed was ours; forour requirements were those resulting from a life-work distinctly unpopular. Outwardly we weredoctors only, but beneath the surface were aims of far greater and more terrible moment—forthe essence of Herbert West’s existence was a quest amid black and forbidden realms ofthe unknown, in which he hoped to uncover the secret of life and restore to perpetual animationthe graveyard’s cold clay. Such a quest demands strange materials, among them fresh humanbodies; and in order to keep supplied with these indispensable things one must live quietlyand not far from a place of informal interment.
West and I had met in college, and I had been the only one to sympathise withhis hideous experiments. Gradually I had come to be his inseparable assistant, and now thatwe were out of college we had to keep together. It was not easy to find a good opening for twodoctors in company, but finally the influence of the university secured us a practice in Bolton—afactory town near Arkham, the seat of the college. The Bolton Worsted Mills are the largestin the Miskatonic Valley, and their polyglot employees are never popular as patients with thelocal physicians. We chose our house with the greatest care, seizing at last on a rather run-downcottage near the end of Pond Street; five numbers from the closest neighbour, and separatedfrom the local potter’s field by only a stretch of meadow land, bisected by a narrow neckof the rather dense forest which lies to the north. The distance was greater than we wished,but we could get no nearer house without going on the other side of the field, wholly out ofthe factory district. We were not much displeased, however, since there were no people betweenus and our sinister source of supplies. The walk was a trifle long, but we could haul our silentspecimens undisturbed.
Our practice was surprisingly large from the very first—large enoughto please most young doctors, and large enough to prove a bore and a burden to students whosereal interest lay elsewhere. The mill-hands were of somewhat turbulent inclinations; and besidestheir many natural needs, their frequent clashes and stabbing affrays gave us plenty to do.But what actually absorbed our minds was the secret laboratory we had fitted up in the cellar—thelaboratory with the long table under the electric lights, where in the small hours of the morningwe often injected West’s various solutions into the veins of the things we dragged fromthe potter’s field. West was experimenting madly to find something which would start man’svital motions anew after they had been stopped by the thing we call death, but had encounteredthe most ghastly obstacles. The solution had to be differently compounded for different types—whatwould serve for guinea-pigs would not serve for human beings, and different human specimensrequired large modifications.
The bodies had to be exceedingly fresh, or the slight decomposition of braintissue would render perfect reanimation impossible. Indeed, the greatest problem was to getthem fresh enough—West had had horrible experiences during his secret college researcheswith corpses of doubtful vintage. The results of partial or imperfect animation were much morehideous than were the total failures, and we both held fearsome recollections of such things.Ever since our first daemoniac session in the deserted farmhouse on Meadow Hill in Arkham, wehad felt a brooding menace; and West, though a calm, blond, blue-eyed scientific automaton inmost respects, often confessed to a shuddering sensation of stealthy pursuit. He half felt thathe was followed—a psychological delusion of shaken nerves, enhanced by the undeniablydisturbing fact that at least one of our reanimated specimens was still alive—a frightfulcarnivorous thing in a padded cell at Sefton. Then there was another—our first—whoseexact fate we had never learned.
We had fair luck with specimens in Bolton—much better than in Arkham.We had not been settled a week before we got an accident victim on the very night of burial,and made it open its eyes with an amazingly rational expression before the solution failed.It had lost an arm—if it had been a perfect body we might have succeeded better. Betweenthen and the next January we secured three more; one total failure, one case of marked muscularmotion, and one rather shivery thing—it rose of itself and uttered a sound. Then camea period when luck was poor; interments fell off, and those that did occur were of specimenseither too diseased or too maimed for use. We kept track of all the deaths and their circumstanceswith systematic care.
One March night, however, we unexpectedly obtained a specimen which did notcome from the potter’s field. In Bolton the prevailing spirit of Puritanism had outlawedthe sport of boxing—with the usual result. Surreptitious and ill-conducted bouts amongthe mill-workers were common, and occasionally professional talent of low grade was imported.This late winter night there had been such a match; evidently with disastrous results, sincetwo timorous Poles had come to us with incoherently whispered entreaties to attend to a verysecret and desperate case. We followed them to an abandoned barn, where the remnants of a crowdof frightened foreigners were watching a silent black form on the floor.
The match had been between Kid O’Brien—a lubberly and now quakingyouth with a most un-Hibernian hooked nose—and Buck Robinson, “The Harlem Smoke”.The negro had been knocked out, and a moment’s examination shewed us that he would permanentlyremain so. He was a loathsome, gorilla-like thing, with abnormally long arms which I could nothelp calling fore legs, and a face that conjured up thoughts of unspeakable Congo secrets andtom-tom poundings under an eerie moon. The body must have looked even worse in life—butthe world holds many ugly things. Fear was upon the whole pitiful crowd, for they did not knowwhat the law would exact of them if the affair were not hushed up; and they were grateful whenWest, in spite of my involuntary shudders, offered to get rid of the thing quietly—fora purpose I knew too well.
There was bright moonlight over the snowless landscape, but we dressed thething and carried it home between us through the deserted streets and meadows, as we had carrieda similar thing one horrible night in Arkham. We approached the house from the field in therear, took the specimen in the back door and down the cellar stairs, and prepared it for theusual experiment. Our fear of the police was absurdly great, though we had timed our trip toavoid the solitary patrolman of that section.
The result was wearily anticlimactic. Ghastly as our prize appeared, it waswholly unresponsive to every solution we injected in its black arm; solutions prepared fromexperience with white specimens only. So as the hour grew dangerously near to dawn, we did aswe had done with the others—dragged the thing across the meadows to the neck of the woodsnear the potter’s field, and buried it there in the best sort of grave the frozen groundwould furnish. The grave was not very deep, but fully as good as that of the previous specimen—thething which had risen of itself and uttered a sound. In the light of our dark lanterns we carefullycovered it with leaves and dead vines, fairly certain that the police would never find it ina forest so dim and dense.
The next day I was increasingly apprehensive about the police, for a patientbrought rumours of a suspected fight and death. West had still another source of worry, forhe had been called in the afternoon to a case which ended very threateningly. An Italian womanhad become hysterical over her missing child—a lad of five who had strayed off early inthe morning and failed to appear for dinner—and had developed symptoms highly alarmingin view of an always weak heart. It was a very foolish hysteria, for the boy had often run awaybefore; but Italian peasants are exceedingly superstitious, and this woman seemed as much harassedby omens as by facts. About seven o’clock in the evening she had died, and her frantichusband had made a frightful scene in his efforts to kill West, whom he wildly blamed for notsaving her life. Friends had held him when he drew a stiletto, but West departed amidst hisinhuman shrieks, curses, and oaths of vengeance. In his latest affliction the fellow seemedto have forgotten his child, who was still missing as the night advanced. There was some talkof searching the woods, but most of the family’s friends were busy with the dead womanand the screaming man. Altogether, the nervous strain upon West must have been tremendous. Thoughtsof the police and of the mad Italian both weighed heavily.
We retired about eleven, but I did not sleep well. Bolton had a surprisinglygood police force for so small a town, and I could not help fearing the mess which would ensueif the affair of the night before were ever tracked down. It might mean the end of all our localwork—and perhaps prison for both West and me. I did not like those rumours of a fightwhich were floating about. After the clock had struck three the moon shone in my eyes, but Iturned over without rising to pull down the shade. Then came the steady rattling at the backdoor.
I lay still and somewhat dazed, but before long heard West’s rap on mydoor. He was clad in dressing-gown and slippers, and had in his hands a revolver and an electricflashlight. From the revolver I knew that he was thinking more of the crazed Italian than ofthe police.
“We’d better both go,” he whispered. “It wouldn’tdo not to answer it anyway, and it may be a patient—it would be like one of those foolsto try the back door.”
So we both went down the stairs on tiptoe, with a fear partly justified andpartly that which comes only from the soul of the weird small hours. The rattling continued,growing somewhat louder. When we reached the door I cautiously unbolted it and threw it open,and as the moon streamed revealingly down on the form silhouetted there, West did a peculiarthing. Despite the obvious danger of attracting notice and bringing down on our heads the dreadedpolice investigation—a thing which after all was mercifully averted by the relative isolationof our cottage—my friend suddenly, excitedly, and unnecessarily emptied all six chambersof his revolver into the nocturnal visitor.
For that visitor was neither Italian nor policeman. Looming hideously againstthe spectral moon was a gigantic misshapen thing not to be imagined save in nightmares—aglassy-eyed, ink-black apparition nearly on all fours, covered with bits of mould, leaves, andvines, foul with caked blood, and having between its glistening teeth a snow-white, terrible,cylindrical object terminating in a tiny hand.

IV. The Scream of the Dead

The scream of a dead man gave to me that acute and added horror of Dr. Herbert West which harassedthe latter years of our companionship. It is natural that such a thing as a dead man’sscream should give horror, for it is obviously not a pleasing or ordinary occurrence; but Iwas used to similar experiences, hence suffered on this occasion only because of a particularcircumstance. And, as I have implied, it was not of the dead man himself that I became afraid.
Herbert West, whose associate and assistant I was, possessed scientific interestsfar beyond the usual routine of a village physician. That was why, when establishing his practicein Bolton, he had chosen an isolated house near the potter’s field. Briefly and brutallystated, West’s sole absorbing interest was a secret study of the phenomena of life andits cessation, leading toward the reanimation of the dead through injections of an excitantsolution. For this ghastly experimenting it was necessary to have a constant supply of veryfresh human bodies; very fresh because even the least decay hopelessly damaged the brain structure,and human because we found that the solution had to be compounded differently for differenttypes of organisms. Scores of rabbits and guinea-pigs had been killed and treated, but theirtrail was a blind one. West had never fully succeeded because he had never been able to securea corpse sufficiently fresh. What he wanted were bodies from which vitality had only just departed;bodies with every cell intact and capable of receiving again the impulse toward that mode ofmotion called life. There was hope that this second and artificial life might be made perpetualby repetitions of the injection, but we had learned that an ordinary natural life would notrespond to the action. To establish the artificial motion, natural life must be extinct—thespecimens must be very fresh, but genuinely dead.
The awesome quest had begun when West and I were students at the MiskatonicUniversity Medical School in Arkham, vividly conscious for the first time of the thoroughlymechanical nature of life. That was seven years before, but West looked scarcely a day oldernow—he was small, blond, clean-shaven, soft-voiced, and spectacled, with only an occasionalflash of a cold blue eye to tell of the hardening and growing fanaticism of his character underthe pressure of his terrible investigations. Our experiences had often been hideous in the extreme;the results of defective reanimation, when lumps of graveyard clay had been galvanised intomorbid, unnatural, and brainless motion by various modifications of the vital solution.
One thing had uttered a nerve-shattering scream; another had risen violently,beaten us both to unconsciousness, and run amuck in a shocking way before it could be placedbehind asylum bars; still another, a loathsome African monstrosity, had clawed out of its shallowgrave and done a deed—West had had to shoot that object. We could not get bodies freshenough to shew any trace of reason when reanimated, so had perforce created nameless horrors.It was disturbing to think that one, perhaps two, of our monsters still lived—that thoughthaunted us shadowingly, till finally West disappeared under frightful circumstances. But atthe time of the scream in the cellar laboratory of the isolated Bolton cottage, our fears weresubordinate to our anxiety for extremely fresh specimens. West was more avid than I, so thatit almost seemed to me that he looked half-covetously at any very healthy living physique.
It was in July, 1910, that the bad luck regarding specimens began to turn.I had been on a long visit to my parents in Illinois, and upon my return found West in a stateof singular elation. He had, he told me excitedly, in all likelihood solved the problem of freshnessthrough an approach from an entirely new angle—that of artificial preservation. I hadknown that he was working on a new and highly unusual embalming compound, and was not surprisedthat it had turned out well; but until he explained the details I was rather puzzled as to howsuch a compound could help in our work, since the objectionable staleness of the specimens waslargely due to delay occurring before we secured them. This, I now saw, West had clearly recognised;creating his embalming compound for future rather than immediate use, and trusting to fate tosupply again some very recent and unburied corpse, as it had years before when we obtained thenegro killed in the Bolton prize-fight. At last fate had been kind, so that on this occasionthere lay in the secret cellar laboratory a corpse whose decay could not by any possibilityhave begun. What would happen on reanimation, and whether we could hope for a revival of mindand reason, West did not venture to predict. The experiment would be a landmark in our studies,and he had saved the new body for my return, so that both might share the spectacle in accustomedfashion.
West told me how he had obtained the specimen. It had been a vigorous man;a well-dressed stranger just off the train on his way to transact some business with the BoltonWorsted Mills. The walk through the town had been long, and by the time the traveller pausedat our cottage to ask the way to the factories his heart had become greatly overtaxed. He hadrefused a stimulant, and had suddenly dropped dead only a moment later. The body, as might beexpected, seemed to West a heaven-sent gift. In his brief conversation the stranger had madeit clear that he was unknown in Bolton, and a search of his pockets subsequently revealed himto be one Robert Leavitt of St. Louis, apparently without a family to make instant inquiriesabout his disappearance. If this man could not be restored to life, no one would know of ourexperiment. We buried our materials in a dense strip of woods between the house and the potter’sfield. If, on the other hand, he could be restored, our fame would be brilliantly and perpetuallyestablished. So without delay West had injected into the body’s wrist the compound whichwould hold it fresh for use after my arrival. The matter of the presumably weak heart, whichto my mind imperiled the success of our experiment, did not appear to trouble West extensively.He hoped at last to obtain what he had never obtained before—a rekindled spark of reasonand perhaps a normal, living creature.
So on the night of July 18, 1910, Herbert West and I stood in the cellar laboratoryand gazed at a white, silent figure beneath the dazzling arc-light. The embalming compound hadworked uncannily well, for as I stared fascinatedly at the sturdy frame which had lain two weekswithout stiffening I was moved to seek West’s assurance that the thing was really dead.This assurance he gave readily enough; reminding me that the reanimating solution was neverused without careful tests as to life; since it could have no effect if any of the originalvitality were present. As West proceeded to take preliminary steps, I was impressed by the vastintricacy of the new experiment; an intricacy so vast that he could trust no hand less delicatethan his own. Forbidding me to touch the body, he first injected a drug in the wrist just besidethe place his needle had punctured when injecting the embalming compound. This, he said, wasto neutralise the compound and release the system to a normal relaxation so that the reanimatingsolution might freely work when injected. Slightly later, when a change and a gentle tremorseemed to affect the dead limbs, West stuffed a pillow-like object violently over the twitchingface, not withdrawing it until the corpse appeared quiet and ready for our attempt at reanimation.The pale enthusiast now applied some last perfunctory tests for absolute lifelessness, withdrewsatisfied, and finally injected into the left arm an accurately measured amount of the vitalelixir, prepared during the afternoon with a greater care than we had used since college days,when our feats were new and groping. I cannot express the wild, breathless suspense with whichwe waited for results on this first really fresh specimen—the first we could reasonablyexpect to open its lips in rational speech, perhaps to tell of what it had seen beyond the unfathomableabyss.
West was a materialist, believing in no soul and attributing all the workingof consciousness to bodily phenomena; consequently he looked for no revelation of hideous secretsfrom gulfs and caverns beyond death’s barrier. I did not wholly disagree with him theoretically,yet held vague instinctive remnants of the primitive faith of my forefathers; so that I couldnot help eyeing the corpse with a certain amount of awe and terrible expectation. Besides—Icould not extract from my memory that hideous, inhuman shriek we heard on the night we triedour first experiment in the deserted farmhouse at Arkham.
Very little time had elapsed before I saw the attempt was not to be a totalfailure. A touch of colour came to cheeks hitherto chalk-white, and spread out under the curiouslyample stubble of sandy beard. West, who had his hand on the pulse of the left wrist, suddenlynodded significantly; and almost simultaneously a mist appeared on the mirror inclined abovethe body’s mouth. There followed a few spasmodic muscular motions, and then an audiblebreathing and visible motion of the chest. I looked at the closed eyelids, and thought I detecteda quivering. Then the lids opened, shewing eyes which were grey, calm, and alive, but stillunintelligent and not even curious.
In a moment of fantastic whim I whispered questions to the reddening ears;questions of other worlds of which the memory might still be present. Subsequent terror drovethem from my mind, but I think the last one, which I repeated, was: “Where have you been?”I do not yet know whether I was answered or not, for no sound came from the well-shaped mouth;but I do know that at that moment I firmly thought the thin lips moved silently, forming syllablesI would have vocalised as “only now” if that phrase had possessed any sense or relevancy.At that moment, as I say, I was elated with the conviction that the one great goal had beenattained; and that for the first time a reanimated corpse had uttered distinct words impelledby actual reason. In the next moment there was no doubt about the triumph; no doubt that thesolution had truly accomplished, at least temporarily, its full mission of restoring rationaland articulate life to the dead. But in that triumph there came to me the greatest of all horrors—nothorror of the thing that spoke, but of the deed that I had witnessed and of the man with whommy professional fortunes were joined.
For that very fresh body, at last writhing into full and terrifying consciousnesswith eyes dilated at the memory of its last scene on earth, threw out its frantic hands in alife and death struggle with the air; and suddenly collapsing into a second and final dissolutionfrom which there could be no return, screamed out the cry that will ring eternally in my achingbrain:
“Help! Keep off, you cursed little tow-head fiend—keep that damnedneedle away from me!”

V. The Horror from the Shadows

Many men have related hideous things, not mentioned in print, which happened on the battlefieldsof the Great War. Some of these things have made me faint, others have convulsed me with devastatingnausea, while still others have made me tremble and look behind me in the dark; yet despitethe worst of them I believe I can myself relate the most hideous thing of all—the shocking,the unnatural, the unbelievable horror from the shadows.
In 1915 I was a physician with the rank of First Lieutenant in a Canadian regimentin Flanders, one of many Americans to precede the government itself into the gigantic struggle.I had not entered the army on my own initiative, but rather as a natural result of the enlistmentof the man whose indispensable assistant I was—the celebrated Boston surgical specialist,Dr. Herbert West. Dr. West had been avid for a chance to serve as surgeon in a great war, andwhen the chance had come he carried me with him almost against my will. There were reasons whyI would have been glad to let the war separate us; reasons why I found the practice of medicineand the companionship of West more and more irritating; but when he had gone to Ottawa and througha colleague’s influence secured a medical commission as Major, I could not resist theimperious persuasion of one determined that I should accompany him in my usual capacity.
When I say that Dr. West was avid to serve in battle, I do not mean to implythat he was either naturally warlike or anxious for the safety of civilisation. Always an ice-coldintellectual machine; slight, blond, blue-eyed, and spectacled; I think he secretly sneeredat my occasional martial enthusiasms and censures of supine neutrality. There was, however,something he wanted in embattled Flanders; and in order to secure it he had to assume a militaryexterior. What he wanted was not a thing which many persons want, but something connected withthe peculiar branch of medical science which he had chosen quite clandestinely to follow, andin which he had achieved amazing and occasionally hideous results. It was, in fact, nothingmore or less than an abundant supply of freshly killed men in every stage of dismemberment.
Herbert West needed fresh bodies because his life-work was the reanimationof the dead. This work was not known to the fashionable clientele who had so swiftly built uphis fame after his arrival in Boston; but was only too well known to me, who had been his closestfriend and sole assistant since the old days in Miskatonic University Medical School at Arkham.It was in those college days that he had begun his terrible experiments, first on small animalsand then on human bodies shockingly obtained. There was a solution which he injected into theveins of dead things, and if they were fresh enough they responded in strange ways. He had hadmuch trouble in discovering the proper formula, for each type of organism was found to needa stimulus especially adapted to it. Terror stalked him when he reflected on his partial failures;nameless things resulting from imperfect solutions or from bodies insufficiently fresh. A certainnumber of these failures had remained alive—one was in an asylum while others had vanished—andas he thought of conceivable yet virtually impossible eventualities he often shivered beneathhis usual stolidity.
West had soon learned that absolute freshness was the prime requisite for usefulspecimens, and had accordingly resorted to frightful and unnatural expedients in body-snatching.In college, and during our early practice together in the factory town of Bolton, my attitudetoward him had been largely one of fascinated admiration; but as his boldness in methods grew,I began to develop a gnawing fear. I did not like the way he looked at healthy living bodies;and then there came a nightmarish session in the cellar laboratory when I learned that a certainspecimen had been a living body when he secured it. That was the first time he had ever beenable to revive the quality of rational thought in a corpse; and his success, obtained at sucha loathsome cost, had completely hardened him.
Of his methods in the intervening five years I dare not speak. I was held tohim by sheer force of fear, and witnessed sights that no human tongue could repeat. GraduallyI came to find Herbert West himself more horrible than anything he did—that was when itdawned on me that his once normal scientific zeal for prolonging life had subtly degeneratedinto a mere morbid and ghoulish curiosity and secret sense of charnel picturesqueness. His interestbecame a hellish and perverse addiction to the repellently and fiendishly abnormal; he gloatedcalmly over artificial monstrosities which would make most healthy men drop dead from frightand disgust; he became, behind his pallid intellectuality, a fastidious Baudelaire of physicalexperiment—a languid Elagabalus of the tombs.
Dangers he met unflinchingly; crimes he committed unmoved. I think the climaxcame when he had proved his point that rational life can be restored, and had sought new worldsto conquer by experimenting on the reanimation of detached parts of bodies. He had wild andoriginal ideas on the independent vital properties of organic cells and nerve-tissue separatedfrom natural physiological systems; and achieved some hideous preliminary results in the formof never-dying, artificially nourished tissue obtained from the nearly hatched eggs of an indescribabletropical reptile. Two biological points he was exceedingly anxious to settle—first, whetherany amount of consciousness and rational action be possible without the brain, proceeding fromthe spinal cord and various nerve-centres; and second, whether any kind of ethereal, intangiblerelation distinct from the material cells may exist to link the surgically separated parts ofwhat has previously been a single living organism. All this research work required a prodigioussupply of freshly slaughtered human flesh—and that was why Herbert West had entered theGreat War.
The phantasmal, unmentionable thing occurred one midnight late in March, 1915,in a field hospital behind the lines at St. Eloi. I wonder even now if it could have been otherthan a daemoniac dream of delirium. West had a private laboratory in an east room of the barn-liketemporary edifice, assigned him on his plea that he was devising new and radical methods forthe treatment of hitherto hopeless cases of maiming. There he worked like a butcher in the midstof his gory wares—I could never get used to the levity with which he handled and classifiedcertain things. At times he actually did perform marvels of surgery for the soldiers; but hischief delights were of a less public and philanthropic kind, requiring many explanations ofsounds which seemed peculiar even amidst that babel of the damned. Among these sounds were frequentrevolver-shots—surely not uncommon on a battlefield, but distinctly uncommon in an hospital.Dr. West’s reanimated specimens were not meant for long existence or a large audience.Besides human tissue, West employed much of the reptile embryo tissue which he had cultivatedwith such singular results. It was better than human material for maintaining life in organlessfragments, and that was now my friend’s chief activity. In a dark corner of the laboratory,over a queer incubating burner, he kept a large covered vat full of this reptilian cell-matter;which multiplied and grew puffily and hideously.
On the night of which I speak we had a splendid new specimen—a man atonce physically powerful and of such high mentality that a sensitive nervous system was assured.It was rather ironic, for he was the officer who had helped West to his commission, and whowas now to have been our associate. Moreover, he had in the past secretly studied the theoryof reanimation to some extent under West. Major Sir Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee, D.S.O., was thegreatest surgeon in our division, and had been hastily assigned to the St. Eloi sector whennews of the heavy fighting reached headquarters. He had come in an aëroplane piloted bythe intrepid Lieut. Ronald Hill, only to be shot down when directly over his destination. Thefall had been spectacular and awful; Hill was unrecognisable afterward, but the wreck yieldedup the great surgeon in a nearly decapitated but otherwise intact condition. West had greedilyseized the lifeless thing which had once been his friend and fellow-scholar; and I shudderedwhen he finished severing the head, placed it in his hellish vat of pulpy reptile-tissue topreserve it for future experiments, and proceeded to treat the decapitated body on the operatingtable. He injected new blood, joined certain veins, arteries, and nerves at the headless neck,and closed the ghastly aperture with engrafted skin from an unidentified specimen which hadborne an officer’s uniform. I knew what he wanted—to see if this highly organisedbody could exhibit, without its head, any of the signs of mental life which had distinguishedSir Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee. Once a student of reanimation, this silent trunk was now gruesomelycalled upon to exemplify it.
I can still see Herbert West under the sinister electric light as he injectedhis reanimating solution into the arm of the headless body. The scene I cannot describe—Ishould faint if I tried it, for there is madness in a room full of classified charnel things,with blood and lesser human debris almost ankle-deep on the slimy floor, and with hideous reptilianabnormalities sprouting, bubbling, and baking over a winking bluish-green spectre of dim flamein a far corner of black shadows.
The specimen, as West repeatedly observed, had a splendid nervous system. Muchwas expected of it; and as a few twitching motions began to appear, I could see the feverishinterest on West’s face. He was ready, I think, to see proof of his increasingly strongopinion that consciousness, reason, and personality can exist independently of the brain—thatman has no central connective spirit, but is merely a machine of nervous matter, each sectionmore or less complete in itself. In one triumphant demonstration West was about to relegatethe mystery of life to the category of myth. The body now twitched more vigorously, and beneathour avid eyes commenced to heave in a frightful way. The arms stirred disquietingly, the legsdrew up, and various muscles contracted in a repulsive kind of writhing. Then the headless thingthrew out its arms in a gesture which was unmistakably one of desperation—an intelligentdesperation apparently sufficient to prove every theory of Herbert West. Certainly, the nerveswere recalling the man’s last act in life; the struggle to get free of the falling aëroplane.
What followed, I shall never positively know. It may have been wholly an hallucinationfrom the shock caused at that instant by the sudden and complete destruction of the buildingin a cataclysm of German shell-fire—who can gainsay it, since West and I were the onlyproved survivors? West liked to think that before his recent disappearance, but there were timeswhen he could not; for it was queer that we both had the same hallucination. The hideous occurrenceitself was very simple, notable only for what it implied.
The body on the table had risen with a blind and terrible groping, and we hadheard a sound. I should not call that sound a voice, for it was too awful. And yet its timbrewas not the most awful thing about it. Neither was its message—it had merely screamed,“Jump, Ronald, for God’s sake, jump!” The awful thing was its source.
For it had come from the large covered vat in that ghoulish corner of crawlingblack shadows.

VI. The Tomb-Legions

When Dr. Herbert West disappeared a year ago, the Boston police questioned me closely. Theysuspected that I was holding something back, and perhaps suspected graver things; but I couldnot tell them the truth because they would not have believed it. They knew, indeed, that Westhad been connected with activities beyond the credence of ordinary men; for his hideous experimentsin the reanimation of dead bodies had long been too extensive to admit of perfect secrecy; butthe final soul-shattering catastrophe held elements of daemoniac phantasy which make even medoubt the reality of what I saw.
I was West’s closest friend and only confidential assistant. We had metyears before, in medical school, and from the first I had shared his terrible researches. Hehad slowly tried to perfect a solution which, injected into the veins of the newly deceased,would restore life; a labour demanding an abundance of fresh corpses and therefore involvingthe most unnatural actions. Still more shocking were the products of some of the experiments—grislymasses of flesh that had been dead, but that West waked to a blind, brainless, nauseous animation.These were the usual results, for in order to reawaken the mind it was necessary to have specimensso absolutely fresh that no decay could possibly affect the delicate brain-cells.
This need for very fresh corpses had been West’s moral undoing. Theywere hard to get, and one awful day he had secured his specimen while it was still alive andvigorous. A struggle, a needle, and a powerful alkaloid had transformed it to a very fresh corpse,and the experiment had succeeded for a brief and memorable moment; but West had emerged witha soul calloused and seared, and a hardened eye which sometimes glanced with a kind of hideousand calculating appraisal at men of especially sensitive brain and especially vigorous physique.Toward the last I became acutely afraid of West, for he began to look at me that way. Peopledid not seem to notice his glances, but they noticed my fear; and after his disappearance usedthat as a basis for some absurd suspicions.
West, in reality, was more afraid than I; for his abominable pursuits entaileda life of furtiveness and dread of every shadow. Partly it was the police he feared; but sometimeshis nervousness was deeper and more nebulous, touching on certain indescribable things intowhich he had injected a morbid life, and from which he had not seen that life depart. He usuallyfinished his experiments with a revolver, but a few times he had not been quick enough. Therewas that first specimen on whose rifled grave marks of clawing were later seen. There was alsothat Arkham professor’s body which had done cannibal things before it had been capturedand thrust unidentified into a madhouse cell at Sefton, where it beat the walls for sixteenyears. Most of the other possibly surviving results were things less easy to speak of—forin later years West’s scientific zeal had degenerated to an unhealthy and fantastic mania,and he had spent his chief skill in vitalising not entire human bodies but isolated parts ofbodies, or parts joined to organic matter other than human. It had become fiendishly disgustingby the time he disappeared; many of the experiments could not even be hinted at in print. TheGreat War, through which both of us served as surgeons, had intensified this side of West.
In saying that West’s fear of his specimens was nebulous, I have in mindparticularly its complex nature. Part of it came merely from knowing of the existence of suchnameless monsters, while another part arose from apprehension of the bodily harm they mightunder certain circumstances do him. Their disappearance added horror to the situation—ofthem all West knew the whereabouts of only one, the pitiful asylum thing. Then there was a moresubtle fear—a very fantastic sensation resulting from a curious experiment in the Canadianarmy in 1915. West, in the midst of a severe battle, had reanimated Major Sir Eric MorelandClapham-Lee, D.S.O., a fellow-physician who knew about his experiments and could have duplicatedthem. The head had been removed, so that the possibilities of quasi-intelligent life in thetrunk might be investigated. Just as the building was wiped out by a German shell, there hadbeen a success. The trunk had moved intelligently; and, unbelievable to relate, we were bothsickeningly sure that articulate sounds had come from the detached head as it lay in a shadowycorner of the laboratory. The shell had been merciful, in a way—but West could never feelas certain as he wished, that we two were the only survivors. He used to make shuddering conjecturesabout the possible actions of a headless physician with the power of reanimating the dead.
West’s last quarters were in a venerable house of much elegance, overlookingone of the oldest burying-grounds in Boston. He had chosen the place for purely symbolic andfantastically aesthetic reasons, since most of the interments were of the colonial period andtherefore of little use to a scientist seeking very fresh bodies. The laboratory was in a sub-cellarsecretly constructed by imported workmen, and contained a huge incinerator for the quiet andcomplete disposal of such bodies, or fragments and synthetic mockeries of bodies, as might remainfrom the morbid experiments and unhallowed amusements of the owner. During the excavation ofthis cellar the workmen had struck some exceedingly ancient masonry; undoubtedly connected withthe old burying-ground, yet far too deep to correspond with any known sepulchre therein. Aftera number of calculations West decided that it represented some secret chamber beneath the tombof the Averills, where the last interment had been made in 1768. I was with him when he studiedthe nitrous, dripping walls laid bare by the spades and mattocks of the men, and was preparedfor the gruesome thrill which would attend the uncovering of centuried grave-secrets; but forthe first time West’s new timidity conquered his natural curiosity, and he betrayed hisdegenerating fibre by ordering the masonry left intact and plastered over. Thus it remainedtill that final hellish night; part of the walls of the secret laboratory. I speak of West’sdecadence, but must add that it was a purely mental and intangible thing. Outwardly he was thesame to the last—calm, cold, slight, and yellow-haired, with spectacled blue eyes anda general aspect of youth which years and fears seemed never to change. He seemed calm evenwhen he thought of that clawed grave and looked over his shoulder; even when he thought of thecarnivorous thing that gnawed and pawed at Sefton bars.
The end of Herbert West began one evening in our joint study when he was dividinghis curious glance between the newspaper and me. A strange headline item had struck at him fromthe crumpled pages, and a nameless titan claw had seemed to reach down through sixteen years.Something fearsome and incredible had happened at Sefton Asylum fifty miles away, stunning theneighbourhood and baffling the police. In the small hours of the morning a body of silent menhad entered the grounds and their leader had aroused the attendants. He was a menacing militaryfigure who talked without moving his lips and whose voice seemed almost ventriloquially connectedwith an immense black case he carried. His expressionless face was handsome to the point ofradiant beauty, but had shocked the superintendent when the hall light fell on it—forit was a wax face with eyes of painted glass. Some nameless accident had befallen this man.A larger man guided his steps; a repellent hulk whose bluish face seemed half eaten away bysome unknown malady. The speaker had asked for the custody of the cannibal monster committedfrom Arkham sixteen years before; and upon being refused, gave a signal which precipitated ashocking riot. The fiends had beaten, trampled, and bitten every attendant who did not flee;killing four and finally succeeding in the liberation of the monster. Those victims who couldrecall the event without hysteria swore that the creatures had acted less like men than likeunthinkable automata guided by the wax-faced leader. By the time help could be summoned, everytrace of the men and of their mad charge had vanished.
From the hour of reading this item until midnight, West sat almost paralysed.At midnight the doorbell rang, startling him fearfully. All the servants were asleep in theattic, so I answered the bell. As I have told the police, there was no wagon in the street;but only a group of strange-looking figures bearing a large square box which they depositedin the hallway after one of them had grunted in a highly unnatural voice, “Express—prepaid.”They filed out of the house with a jerky tread, and as I watched them go I had an odd idea thatthey were turning toward the ancient cemetery on which the back of the house abutted. When Islammed the door after them West came downstairs and looked at the box. It was about two feetsquare, and bore West’s correct name and present address. It also bore the inscription,“From Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee, St. Eloi, Flanders”. Six years before, in Flanders,a shelled hospital had fallen upon the headless reanimated trunk of Dr. Clapham-Lee, and uponthe detached head which—perhaps—had uttered articulate sounds.
West was not even excited now. His condition was more ghastly. Quickly he said,“It’s the finish—but let’s incinerate—this.” We carriedthe thing down to the laboratory—listening. I do not remember many particulars—youcan imagine my state of mind—but it is a vicious lie to say it was Herbert West’sbody which I put into the incinerator. We both inserted the whole unopened wooden box, closedthe door, and started the electricity. Nor did any sound come from the box, after all.
It was West who first noticed the falling plaster on that part of the wallwhere the ancient tomb masonry had been covered up. I was going to run, but he stopped me. ThenI saw a small black aperture, felt a ghoulish wind of ice, and smelled the charnel bowels ofa putrescent earth. There was no sound, but just then the electric lights went out and I sawoutlined against some phosphorescence of the nether world a horde of silent toiling things whichonly insanity—or worse—could create. Their outlines were human, semi-human, fractionallyhuman, and not human at all—the horde was grotesquely heterogeneous. They were removingthe stones quietly, one by one, from the centuried wall. And then, as the breach became largeenough, they came out into the laboratory in single file; led by a stalking thing with a beautifulhead made of wax. A sort of mad-eyed monstrosity behind the leader seized on Herbert West. Westdid not resist or utter a sound. Then they all sprang at him and tore him to pieces before myeyes, bearing the fragments away into that subterranean vault of fabulous abominations. West’shead was carried off by the wax-headed leader, who wore a Canadian officer’s uniform.As it disappeared I saw that the blue eyes behind the spectacles were hideously blazing withtheir first touch of frantic, visible emotion.
Servants found me unconscious in the morning. West was gone. The incineratorcontained only unidentifiable ashes. Detectives have questioned me, but what can I say? TheSefton tragedy they will not connect with West; not that, nor the men with the box, whose existencethey deny. I told them of the vault, and they pointed to the unbroken plaster wall and laughed.So I told them no more. They imply that I am a madman or a murderer—probably I am mad.But I might not be mad if those accursed tomb-legions had not been so silent.
