To S. L.

“Apropos of sleep, that sinister adventure of all our nights, we may say thatmen go to bed daily with an audacity that would be incomprehensible if we did not know thatit is the result of ignorance of the danger.”
—Baudelaire.May the merciful gods, if indeed there be such, guard those hours when no power of the will,or drug that the cunning of man devises, can keep me from the chasm of sleep. Death is merciful,for there is no return therefrom, but with him who has come back out of the nethermost chambersof night, haggard and knowing, peace rests nevermore. Fool that I was to plunge with such unsanctionedphrensy into mysteries no man was meant to penetrate; fool or god that he was—myonly friend, who led me and went before me, and who in the end passed into terrors which mayyet be mine.
We met, I recall, in a railway station, where he was the centre of a crowdof the vulgarly curious. He was unconscious, having fallen in a kind of convulsion which impartedto his slight black-clad body a strange rigidity. I think he was then approaching forty yearsof age, for there were deep lines in the face, wan and hollow-cheeked, but oval and actuallybeautiful; and touches of grey in the thick, waving hair and small full beard which hadonce been of the deepest raven black. His brow was white as the marble of Pentelicus, and ofa height and breadth almost godlike. I said to myself, with all the ardour of a sculptor, thatthis man was a faun’s statue out of antique Hellas, dug from a temple’s ruins andbrought somehow to life in our stifling age only to feel the chill and pressure of devastatingyears. And when he opened his immense, sunken, and wildly luminous black eyes I knew he wouldbe thenceforth my only friend—the only friend of one who had never possessed a friendbefore—for I saw that such eyes must have looked fully upon the grandeur and the terrorof realms beyond normal consciousness and reality; realms which I had cherished in fancy, butvainly sought. So as I drove the crowd away I told him he must come home with me and be my teacherand leader in unfathomed mysteries, and he assented without speaking a word. Afterward I foundthat his voice was music—the music of deep viols and of crystalline spheres. We talkedoften in the night, and in the day, when I chiselled busts of him and carved miniature headsin ivory to immortalise his different expressions.
Of our studies it is impossible to speak, since they held so slight a connexionwith anything of the world as living men conceive it. They were of that vaster and more appallinguniverse of dim entity and consciousness which lies deeper than matter, time, and space, andwhose existence we suspect only in certain forms of sleep—those rare dreams beyond dreamswhich come never to common men, and but once or twice in the lifetime of imaginative men. Thecosmos of our waking knowledge, born from such an universe as a bubble is born from the pipeof a jester, touches it only as such a bubble may touch its sardonic source when sucked backby the jester’s whim. Men of learning suspect it little, and ignore it mostly. Wise menhave interpreted dreams, and the gods have laughed. One man with Oriental eyes has said thatall time and space are relative, and men have laughed. But even that man with Oriental eyeshas done no more than suspect. I had wished and tried to do more than suspect, and my friendhad tried and partly succeeded. Then we both tried together, and with exotic drugs courted terribleand forbidden dreams in the tower studio chamber of the old manor-house in hoary Kent.
Among the agonies of these after days is that chief of torments—inarticulateness.What I learned and saw in those hours of impious exploration can never be told—for wantof symbols or suggestions in any language. I say this because from first to last our discoveriespartook only of the nature of sensations; sensations correlated with no impression whichthe nervous system of normal humanity is capable of receiving. They were sensations, yet withinthem lay unbelievable elements of time and space—things which at bottom possess no distinctand definite existence. Human utterance can best convey the general character of our experiencesby calling them plungings or soarings; for in every period of revelation somepart of our minds broke boldly away from all that is real and present, rushing aëriallyalong shocking, unlighted, and fear-haunted abysses, and occasionally tearing throughcertain well-marked and typical obstacles describable only as viscous, uncouth clouds or vapours.In these black and bodiless flights we were sometimes alone and sometimes together. When wewere together, my friend was always far ahead; I could comprehend his presence despite the absenceof form by a species of pictorial memory whereby his face appeared to me, golden from a strangelight and frightful with its weird beauty, its anomalously youthful cheeks, its burning eyes,its Olympian brow, and its shadowing hair and growth of beard.
Of the progress of time we kept no record, for time had become to us the merestillusion. I know only that there must have been something very singular involved, since we cameat length to marvel why we did not grow old. Our discourse was unholy, and always hideouslyambitious—no god or daemon could have aspired to discoveries and conquests like thosewhich we planned in whispers. I shiver as I speak of them, and dare not be explicit; thoughI will say that my friend once wrote on paper a wish which he dared not utter with his tongue,and which made me burn the paper and look affrightedly out of the window at the spangled nightsky. I will hint—only hint—that he had designs which involved the rulership of thevisible universe and more; designs whereby the earth and the stars would move at his command,and the destinies of all living things be his. I affirm—I swear—that I had no sharein these extreme aspirations. Anything my friend may have said or written to the contrary mustbe erroneous, for I am no man of strength to risk the unmentionable warfare in unmentionablespheres by which alone one might achieve success.
There was a night when winds from unknown spaces whirled us irresistibly intolimitless vacua beyond all thought and entity. Perceptions of the most maddeningly untransmissiblesort thronged upon us; perceptions of infinity which at the time convulsed us with joy, yetwhich are now partly lost to my memory and partly incapable of presentation to others. Viscousobstacles were clawed through in rapid succession, and at length I felt that we had been borneto realms of greater remoteness than any we had previously known. My friend was vastly in advanceas we plunged into this awesome ocean of virgin aether, and I could see the sinister exultationon his floating, luminous, too youthful memory-face. Suddenly that face became dim and quicklydisappeared, and in a brief space I found myself projected against an obstacle which I couldnot penetrate. It was like the others, yet incalculably denser; a sticky, clammy mass, if suchterms can be applied to analogous qualities in a non-material sphere.
I had, I felt, been halted by a barrier which my friend and leader had successfullypassed. Struggling anew, I came to the end of the drug-dream and opened my physical eyes tothe tower studio in whose opposite corner reclined the pallid and still unconscious form ofmy fellow-dreamer, weirdly haggard and wildly beautiful as the moon shed gold-green light onhis marble features. Then, after a short interval, the form in the corner stirred; and may pityingheaven keep from my sight and sound another thing like that which took place before me. I cannottell you how he shrieked, or what vistas of unvisitable hells gleamed for a second in blackeyes crazed with fright. I can only say that I fainted, and did not stir till he himself recoveredand shook me in his phrensy for someone to keep away the horror and desolation.
That was the end of our voluntary searchings in the caverns of dream. Awed,shaken, and portentous, my friend who had been beyond the barrier warned me that we must neverventure within those realms again. What he had seen, he dared not tell me; but he said fromhis wisdom that we must sleep as little as possible, even if drugs were necessary to keep usawake. That he was right, I soon learned from the unutterable fear which engulfed me wheneverconsciousness lapsed. After each short and inevitable sleep I seemed older, whilst my friendaged with a rapidity almost shocking. It is hideous to see wrinkles form and hair whiten almostbefore one’s eyes. Our mode of life was now totally altered. Heretofore a recluse so faras I know—his true name and origin never having passed his lips—my friend now becamefrantic in his fear of solitude. At night he would not be alone, nor would the company of afew persons calm him. His sole relief was obtained in revelry of the most general and boisteroussort; so that few assemblies of the young and the gay were unknown to us. Our appearance andage seemed to excite in most cases a ridicule which I keenly resented, but which my friend considereda lesser evil than solitude. Especially was he afraid to be out of doors alone when the starswere shining, and if forced to this condition he would often glance furtively at the sky asif hunted by some monstrous thing therein. He did not always glance at the same place in thesky—it seemed to be a different place at different times. On spring evenings it wouldbe low in the northeast. In the summer it would be nearly overhead. In the autumn it would bein the northwest. In winter it would be in the east, but mostly if in the small hours of morning.Midwinter evenings seemed least dreadful to him. Only after two years did I connect this fearwith anything in particular; but then I began to see that he must be looking at a special spoton the celestial vault whose position at different times corresponded to the direction of hisglance—a spot roughly marked by the constellation Corona Borealis.
We now had a studio in London, never separating, but never discussing the dayswhen we had sought to plumb the mysteries of the unreal world. We were aged and weak from ourdrugs, dissipations, and nervous overstrain, and the thinning hair and beard of my friend hadbecome snow-white. Our freedom from long sleep was surprising, for seldom did we succumb morethan an hour or two at a time to the shadow which had now grown so frightful a menace. Thencame one January of fog and rain, when money ran low and drugs were hard to buy. My statuesand ivory heads were all sold, and I had no means to purchase new materials, or energy to fashionthem even had I possessed them. We suffered terribly, and on a certain night my friend sankinto a deep-breathing sleep from which I could not awaken him. I can recall the scene now—thedesolate, pitch-black garret studio under the eaves with the rain beating down; the tickingof the lone clock; the fancied ticking of our watches as they rested on the dressing-table;the creaking of some swaying shutter in a remote part of the house; certain distant city noisesmuffled by fog and space; and worst of all the deep, steady, sinister breathing of my friendon the couch—a rhythmical breathing which seemed to measure moments of supernal fear andagony for his spirit as it wandered in spheres forbidden, unimagined, and hideously remote.
The tension of my vigil became oppressive, and a wild train of trivial impressionsand associations thronged through my almost unhinged mind. I heard a clock strike somewhere—notours, for that was not a striking clock—and my morbid fancy found in this a new starting-pointfor idle wanderings. Clocks—time—space—infinity—and then my fancy revertedto the local as I reflected that even now, beyond the roof and the fog and the rain and theatmosphere, Corona Borealis was rising in the northeast. Corona Borealis, which my friend hadappeared to dread, and whose scintillant semicircle of stars must even now be glowing unseenthrough the measureless abysses of aether. All at once my feverishly sensitive ears seemed todetect a new and wholly distinct component in the soft medley of drug-magnified sounds—alow and damnably insistent whine from very far away; droning, clamouring, mocking, calling,from the northeast.
But it was not that distant whine which robbed me of my faculties and set uponmy soul such a seal of fright as may never in life be removed; not that which drew the shrieksand excited the convulsions which caused lodgers and police to break down the door. It was notwhat I heard, but what I saw; for in that dark, locked, shuttered, and curtainedroom there appeared from the black northeast corner a shaft of horrible red-gold light—ashaft which bore with it no glow to disperse the darkness, but which streamed only upon therecumbent head of the troubled sleeper, bringing out in hideous duplication the luminous andstrangely youthful memory-face as I had known it in dreams of abysmal space and unshackled time,when my friend had pushed behind the barrier to those secret, innermost, and forbidden cavernsof nightmare.
And as I looked, I beheld the head rise, the black, liquid, and deep-sunkeneyes open in terror, and the thin, shadowed lips part as if for a scream too frightful to beuttered. There dwelt in that ghastly and flexible face, as it shone bodiless, luminous, andrejuvenated in the blackness, more of stark, teeming, brain-shattering fear than all the restof heaven and earth has ever revealed to me. No word was spoken amidst the distant sound thatgrew nearer and nearer, but as I followed the memory-face’s mad stare along that cursedshaft of light to its source, the source whence also the whining came, I too saw for an instantwhat it saw, and fell with ringing ears in that fit of shrieking and epilepsy which broughtthe lodgers and the police. Never could I tell, try as I might, what it actually was that Isaw; nor could the still face tell, for although it must have seen more than I did, it willnever speak again. But always I shall guard against the mocking and insatiate Hypnos, lord ofsleep, against the night sky, and against the mad ambitions of knowledge and philosophy.
Just what happened is unknown, for not only was my own mind unseated by thestrange and hideous thing, but others were tainted with a forgetfulness which can mean nothingif not madness. They have said, I know not for what reason, that I never had a friend, but thatart, philosophy, and insanity had filled all my tragic life. The lodgers and police on thatnight soothed me, and the doctor administered something to quiet me, nor did anyone see whata nightmare event had taken place. My stricken friend moved them to no pity, but what they foundon the couch in the studio made them give me a praise which sickened me, and now a fame whichI spurn in despair as I sit for hours, bald, grey-bearded, shrivelled, palsied, drug-crazed,and broken, adoring and praying to the object they found.
For they deny that I sold the last of my statuary, and point with ecstasy atthe thing which the shining shaft of light left cold, petrified, and unvocal. It is all thatremains of my friend; the friend who led me on to madness and wreckage; a godlike head of suchmarble as only old Hellas could yield, young with the youth that is outside time, and with beauteousbearded face, curved, smiling lips, Olympian brow, and dense locks waving and poppy-crowned.They say that that haunting memory-face is modelled from my own, as it was at twenty-five, butupon the marble base is carven a single name in the letters of Attica—’ΥΠΝΟΣ.
