Before I try to rest I will set down these notes in preparation for the report I must make. What Ihave found is so singular, and so contrary to all past experience and expectations, that itdeserves a very careful description.
I reached the main landing on Venus March 18, terrestrial time; VI, 9 of theplanet’s calendar. Being put in the main group under Miller, I received myequipment—watch tuned to Venus’s slightly quicker rotation—and went through theusual mask drill. After two days I was pronounced fit for duty.
Leaving the Crystal Company’s post at Terra Nova around dawn, VI, 12, Ifollowed the southerly route which Anderson had mapped out from the air. The going was bad, forthese jungles are always half impassable after a rain. It must be the moisture that gives thetangled vines and creepers that leathery toughness; a toughness so great that a knife has to workten minutes on some of them. By noon it was dryer—the vegetation getting soft and rubbery sothat the knife went through it easily—but even then I could not make much speed. These Carteroxygen masks are too heavy—just carrying one half wears an ordinary man out. A Dubois maskwith sponge-reservoir instead of tubes would give just as good air at half the weight.
The crystal-detector seemed to function well, pointing steadily in a directionverifying Anderson’s report. It is curious how that principle of affinity works—withoutany of the fakery of the old ‘divining rods’ back home. There must be a great deposit ofcrystals within a thousand miles, though I suppose those damnable man-lizards always watch andguard it. Possibly they think we are just as foolish for coming to Venus to hunt the stuff as wethink they are for grovelling in the mud whenever they see a piece of it, or for keeping that greatmass on a pedestal in their temple. I wish they’d get a new religion, for they have no use forthe crystals except to pray to. Barring theology, they would let us take all we want—and evenif they learned to tap them for power there’d be more than enough for their planet and theearth besides. I for one am tired of passing up the main deposits and merely seeking separatecrystals out of jungle river-beds. Sometime I’ll urge the wiping out of these scaly beggars bya good stiff army from home. About twenty ships could bring enough troops across to turn the trick.One can’t call the damned things men for all their “cities” and towers. Theyhaven’t any skill except building—and using swords and poison darts—and I don’tbelieve their so-called “cities” mean much more than ant-hills or beaver-dams. I doubt ifthey even have a real language—all the talk about psychological communication through thosetentacles down their chests strikes me as bunk. What misleads people is their upright posture; justan accidental physical resemblance to terrestrial man.
I’d like to go through a Venus jungle for once without having to watch outfor skulking groups of them or dodge their cursed darts. They may have been all right before webegan to take the crystals, but they’re certainly a bad enough nuisance now—with theirdart-shooting and their cutting of our water pipes. More and more I come to believe that they havea special sense like our crystal-detectors. No one ever knew them to bother a man—apart fromlong-distance sniping—who didn’t have crystals on him.
Around 1 p.m. a dart nearly took my helmet off, and I thought for a second one ofmy oxygen tubes was punctured. The sly devils hadn’t made a sound, but three of them wereclosing in on me. I got them all by sweeping in a circle with my flame pistol, for even thoughtheir colour blended with the jungle, I could spot the moving creepers. One of them was fully eightfeet tall, with a snout like a tapir’s. The other two were average seven-footers. All thatmakes them hold their own is sheer numbers—even a single regiment of flame throwers couldraise hell with them. It is curious, though, how they’ve come to be dominant on the planet.Not another living thing higher than the wriggling akmans and skorahs, or the flying tukahs of theother continent—unless of course those holes in the Dionaean Plateau hide something.
About two o’clock my detector veered westward, indicating isolated crystalsahead on the right. This checked up with Anderson, and I turned my course accordingly. It washarder going—not only because the ground was rising, but because the animal life andcarnivorous plants were thicker. I was always slashing ugrats and stepping on skorahs, and myleather suit was all speckled from the bursting darohs which struck it from all sides. The sunlightwas all the worse because of the mist, and did not seem to dry up the mud in the least. Every timeI stepped my feet sank down five or six inches, and there was a sucking sort of blup everytime I pulled them out. I wish somebody would invent a safe kind of suiting other than leather forthis climate. Cloth of course would rot; but some thin metallic tissue that couldn’ttear—like the surface of this revolving decay-proof record scroll—ought to be feasiblesome time.
I ate about 3:30—if slipping these wretched food tablets through my mask canbe called eating. Soon after that I noticed a decided change in the landscape—the bright,poisonous-looking flowers shifting in colour and getting wraith-like. The outlines of everythingshimmered rhythmically, and bright points of light appeared and danced in the same slow, steadytempo. After that the temperature seemed to fluctuate in unison with a peculiar rhythmicdrumming.
The whole universe seemed to be throbbing in deep, regular pulsations that filledevery corner of space and flowed through my body and mind alike. I lost all sense of equilibriumand staggered dizzily, nor did it change things in the least when I shut my eyes and covered myears with my hands. However, my mind was still clear, and in a very few minutes I realised what hadhappened.
I had encountered at last one of those curious mirage-plants about which so manyof our men told stories. Anderson had warned me of them, and described their appearance veryclosely—the shaggy stalk, the spiky leaves, and the mottled blossoms whose gaseous,dream-breeding exhalations penetrate every existing make of mask.
Recalling what happened to Bailey three years ago, I fell into a momentary panic,and began to dash and stagger about in the crazy, chaotic world which the plant’s exhalationshad woven around me. Then good sense came back, and I realised all I need do was retreat from thedangerous blossoms; heading away from the source of the pulsations, and cutting a pathblindly—regardless of what might seem to swirl around me—until safely out of theplant’s effective radius.
Although everything was spinning perilously, I tried to start in the rightdirection and hack my way ahead. My route must have been far from straight, for it seemed hoursbefore I was free of the mirage-plant’s pervasive influence. Gradually the dancing lightsbegan to disappear, and the shimmering spectral scenery began to assume the aspect of solidity.When I did get wholly clear I looked at my watch and was astonished to find that the time was only4:20. Though eternities had seemed to pass, the whole experience could have consumed little morethan a half-hour.
Every delay, however, was irksome, and I had lost ground in my retreat from theplant. I now pushed ahead in the uphill direction indicated by the crystal-detector, bending everyenergy toward making better time. The jungle was still thick, though there was less animal life.Once a carnivorous blossom engulfed my right foot and held it so tightly that I had to hack it freewith my knife; reducing the flower to strips before it let go.
In less than an hour I saw that the jungle growths were thinning out, and by fiveo’clock—after passing through a belt of tree-ferns with very little underbrush—Iemerged on a broad mossy plateau. My progress now became rapid, and I saw by the wavering of mydetector-needle that I was getting relatively close to the crystal I sought. This was odd, for mostof the scattered, egg-like spheroids occurred in jungle streams of a sort not likely to be found onthis treeless upland.
The terrain sloped upward, ending in a definite crest. I reached the top about5:30, and saw ahead of me a very extensive plain with forests in the distance. This, withoutquestion, was the plateau mapped by Matsugawa from the air fifty years ago, and called on our maps“Eryx” or the “Erycinian Highland.” But what made my heart leap was a smallerdetail, whose position could not have been far from the plain’s exact centre. It was a singlepoint of light, blazing through the mist and seeming to draw a piercing, concentrated luminescencefrom the yellowish, vapour-dulled sunbeams. This, without doubt, was the crystal I sought—athing possibly no larger than a hen’s egg, yet containing enough power to keep a city warm fora year. I could hardly wonder, as I glimpsed the distant glow, that those miserable man-lizardsworship such crystals. And yet they have not the least notion of the powers they contain.
Breaking into a rapid run, I tried to reach the unexpected prize as soon aspossible; and was annoyed when the firm moss gave place to a thin, singularly detestable mudstudded with occasional patches of weeds and creepers. But I splashed on heedlessly—scarcelythinking to look around for any of the skulking man-lizards. In this open space I was not verylikely to be waylaid. As I advanced, the light ahead seemed to grow in size and brilliancy, and Ibegan to notice some peculiarity in its situation. Clearly, this was a crystal of the very finestquality, and my elation grew with every spattering step.
It is now that I must begin to be careful in making my report, since what I shallhenceforward have to say involves unprecedented—though fortunately verifiable—matters. Iwas racing ahead with mounting eagerness, and had come within an hundred yards or so of thecrystal—whose position on a sort of raised place in the omnipresent slime seemed veryodd—when a sudden, overpowering force struck my chest and the knuckles of my clenched fistsand knocked me over backward into the mud. The splash of my fall was terrific, nor did the softnessof the ground and the presence of some slimy weeds and creepers save my head from a bewilderingjarring. For a moment I lay supine, too utterly startled to think. Then I half-mechanicallystumbled to my feet and began to scrape the worst of the mud and scum from my leather suit.
Of what I had encountered I could not form the faintest idea. I had seen nothingwhich could have caused the shock, and I saw nothing now. Had I, after all, merely slipped in themud? My sore knuckles and aching chest forbade me to think so. Or was this whole incident anillusion brought on by some hidden mirage-plant? It hardly seemed probable, since I had none of theusual symptoms, and since there was no place near by where so vivid and typical a growth could lurkunseen. Had I been on the earth, I would have suspected a barrier of N-force laid down by somegovernment to mark a forbidden zone, but in this humanless region such a notion would have beenabsurd.
Finally pulling myself together, I decided to investigate in a cautious way.Holding my knife as far as possible ahead of me, so that it might be first to feel the strangeforce, I started once more for the shining crystal—preparing to advance step by step with thegreatest deliberation. At the third step I was brought up short by the impact of theknife-point on an apparently solid surface—a solid surface where my eyes saw nothing.
After a moment’s recoil I gained boldness. Extending my gloved left hand, Iverified the presence of invisible solid matter—or a tactile illusion of solidmatter—ahead of me. Upon moving my hand I found that the barrier was of substantial extent,and of an almost glassy smoothness, with no evidence of the joining of separate blocks. Nervingmyself for further experiments, I removed a glove and tested the thing with my bare hand. It wasindeed hard and glassy, and of a curious coldness as contrasted with the air around. I strained myeyesight to the utmost in an effort to glimpse some trace of the obstructing substance, but coulddiscern nothing whatsoever. There was not even any evidence of refractive power as judged by theaspect of the landscape ahead. Absence of reflective power was proved by the lack of a glowingimage of the sun at any point.
Burning curiosity began to displace all other feelings, and I enlarged myinvestigations as best I could. Exploring with my hands, I found that the barrier extended from theground to some level higher than I could reach, and that it stretched off indefinitely on bothsides. It was, then, a wall of some kind—though all guesses as to its materials and itspurpose were beyond me. Again I thought of the mirage-plant and the dreams it induced, but amoment’s reasoning put this out of my head.
Knocking sharply on the barrier with the hilt of my knife, and kicking at it withmy heavy boots, I tried to interpret the sounds thus made. There was something suggestive of cementor concrete in these reverberations, though my hands had found the surface more glassy or metallicin feel. Certainly, I was confronting something strange beyond all previous experience.
The next logical move was to get some idea of the wall’s dimensions. Theheight problem would be hard if not insoluble, but the length and shape problem could perhaps besooner dealt with. Stretching out my arms and pressing close to the barrier, I began to edgegradually to the left—keeping very careful track of the way I faced. After several steps Iconcluded that the wall was not straight, but that I was following part of some vast circle orellipse. And then my attention was distracted by something wholly different—somethingconnected with the still-distant crystal which had formed the object of my quest.
I have said that even from a greater distance the shining object’s positionseemed indefinably queer—on a slight mound rising from the slime. Now—at about an hundredyards—I could see plainly despite the engulfing mist just what that mound was. It was the bodyof a man in one of the Crystal Company’s leather suits, lying on his back, and with his oxygenmask half buried in the mud a few inches away. In his right hand, crushed convulsively against hischest, was the crystal which had led me here—a spheroid of incredible size, so large that thedead fingers could scarcely close over it. Even at the given distance I could see that the body wasa recent one. There was little visible decay, and I reflected that in this climate such a thingmeant death not more than a day before. Soon the hateful farnoth-flies would begin to cluster aboutthe corpse. I wondered who the man was. Surely no one I had seen on this trip. It must have beenone of the old-timers absent on a long roving commission, who had come to this especial regionindependently of Anderson’s survey. There he lay, past all trouble, and with the rays of thegreat crystal streaming out from between his stiffened fingers.
For fully five minutes I stood there staring in bewilderment and apprehension. Acurious dread assailed me, and I had an unreasonable impulse to run away. It could not have beendone by those slinking man-lizards, for he still held the crystal he had found. Was there anyconnexion with the invisible wall? Where had he found the crystal? Anderson’s instrument hadindicated one in this quarter well before this man could have perished. I now began to regard theunseen barrier as something sinister, and recoiled from it with a shudder. Yet I knew I must probethe mystery all the more quickly and thoroughly because of this recent tragedy.
Suddenly—wrenching my mind back to the problem I faced—I thought of apossible means of testing the wall’s height, or at least of finding whether or not it extendedindefinitely upward. Seizing a handful of mud, I let it drain until it gained some coherence andthen flung it high in the air toward the utterly transparent barrier. At a height of perhapsfourteen feet it struck the invisible surface with a resounding splash, disintegrating at once andoozing downward in disappearing streams with surprising rapidity. Plainly, the wall was a loftyone. A second handful, hurled at an even sharper angle, hit the surface about eighteen feet fromthe ground and disappeared as quickly as the first.
I now summoned up all my strength and prepared to throw a third handful as high asI possibly could. Letting the mud drain, and squeezing it to maximum dryness, I flung it up sosteeply that I feared it might not reach the obstructing surface at all. It did, however, and thistime it crossed the barrier and fell in the mud beyond with a violent spattering. At last I had arough idea of the height of the wall, for the crossing had evidently occurred some twenty or 21feet aloft.
With a nineteen- or twenty-foot vertical wall of glassy flatness, ascent wasclearly impossible. I must, then, continue to circle the barrier in the hope of finding a gate, anending, or some sort of interruption. Did the obstacle form a complete round or other closedfigure, or was it merely an arc or semicircle? Acting on my decision, I resumed my slow leftwardcircling, moving my hands up and down over the unseen surface on the chance of finding some windowor other small aperture. Before starting, I tried to mark my position by kicking a hole in the mud,but found the slime too thin to hold any impression. I did, though, gauge the place approximatelyby noting a tall cycad in the distant forest which seemed just on a line with the gleaming crystalan hundred yards away. If no gate or break existed I could now tell when I had completelycircumnavigated the wall.
I had not progressed far before I decided that the curvature indicated a circularenclosure of about an hundred yards’ diameter—provided the outline was regular. This wouldmean that the dead man lay near the wall at a point almost opposite the region where I had started.Was he just inside or just outside the enclosure? This I would soon ascertain.
As I slowly rounded the barrier without finding any gate, window, or other break,I decided that the body was lying within. On closer view, the features of the dead man seemedvaguely disturbing. I found something alarming in his expression, and in the way the glassy eyesstared. By the time I was very near I believed I recognised him as Dwight, a veteran whom I hadnever known, but who was pointed out to me at the post last year. The crystal he clutched wascertainly a prize—the largest single specimen I had ever seen.
I was so near the body that I could—but for the barrier—have touched it,when my exploring left hand encountered a corner in the unseen surface. In a second I had learnedthat there was an opening about three feet wide, extending from the ground to a height greater thanI could reach. There was no door, nor any evidence of hinge-marks bespeaking a former door. Withouta moment’s hesitation I stepped through and advanced two paces to the prostratebody—which lay at right angles to the hallway I had entered, in what seemed to be anintersecting doorless corridor. It gave me a fresh curiosity to find that the interior of this vastenclosure was divided by partitions.
Bending to examine the corpse, I discovered that it bore no wounds. This scarcelysurprised me, since the continued presence of the crystal argued against the pseudo-reptiliannatives. Looking about for some possible cause of death, my eyes lit upon the oxygen mask lyingclose to the body’s feet. Here, indeed, was something significant. Without this device nohuman being could breathe the air of Venus for more than thirty seconds, and Dwight—if it werehe—had obviously lost his. Probably it had been carelessly buckled, so that the weight of thetubes worked the straps loose—a thing which could not happen with a Dubois sponge-reservoirmask. The half-minute of grace had been too short to allow the man to stoop and recover hisprotection—or else the cyanogen content of the atmosphere was abnormally high at the time.Probably he had been busy admiring the crystal—wherever he may have found it. He had,apparently, just taken it from the pouch in his suit, for the flap was unbuttoned.
I now proceeded to extricate the huge crystal from the dead prospector’sfingers—a task which the body’s stiffness made very difficult. The spheroid was largerthan a man’s fist, and glowed as if alive in the reddish rays of the westering sun. As Itouched the gleaming surface I shuddered involuntarily—as if by taking this precious object Ihad transferred to myself the doom which had overtaken its earlier bearer. However, my qualms soonpassed, and I carefully buttoned the crystal into the pouch of my leather suit. Superstition hasnever been one of my failings.
Placing the man’s helmet over his dead, staring face, I straightened up andstepped back through the unseen doorway to the entrance hall of the great enclosure. All mycuriosity about the strange edifice now returned, and I racked my brain with speculationsregarding its material, origin, and purpose. That the hands of men had reared it I could not for amoment believe. Our ships first reached Venus only 72 years ago, and the only human beingson the planet have been those at Terra Nova. Nor does human knowledge include any perfectlytransparent, non-refractive solid such as the substance of this building. Prehistoric humaninvasions of Venus can be pretty well ruled out, so that one must turn to the idea of nativeconstruction. Did a forgotten race of highly evolved beings precede the man-lizards as masters ofVenus? Despite their elaborately built cities, it seemed hard to credit the pseudo-reptiles withanything of this kind. There must have been another race aeons ago, of which this is perhaps thelast relique. Or will other ruins of kindred origin be found by future expeditions? Thepurpose of such a structure passes all conjecture—but its strange and seeminglynon-practical material suggests a religious use.
Realising my inability to solve these problems, I decided that all I could do wasto explore the invisible structure itself. That various rooms and corridors extended over theseemingly unbroken plain of mud I felt convinced; and I believed that a knowledge of their planmight lead to something significant. So, feeling my way back through the doorway and edging pastthe body, I began to advance along the corridor toward those interior regions whence the dead manhad presumably come. Later on I would investigate the hallway I had left.
Groping like a blind man despite the misty sunlight, I moved slowly onward. Soonthe corridor turned sharply and began to spiral in toward the centre in ever-diminishing curves.Now and then my touch would reveal a doorless intersecting passage, and I several times encounteredjunctions with two, three, or four diverging avenues. In these latter cases I always followed theinmost route, which seemed to form a continuation of the one I had been traversing. There would beplenty of time to examine the branches after I had reached and returned from the main regions. Ican scarcely describe the strangeness of the experience—threading the unseen ways of aninvisible structure reared by forgotten hands on an alien planet!
At last, still stumbling and groping, I felt the corridor end in a sizeable openspace. Fumbling about, I found I was in a circular chamber about ten feet across; and from theposition of the dead man against certain distant forest landmarks I judged that this chamber lay ator near the centre of the edifice. Out of it opened five corridors besides the one through which Ihad entered, but I kept the latter in mind by sighting very carefully past the body to a particulartree on the horizon as I stood just within the entrance.
There was nothing in this room to distinguish it—merely the floor of thin mudwhich was everywhere present. Wondering whether this part of the building had any roof, I repeatedmy experiment with an upward-flung handful of mud, and found at once that no covering existed. Ifthere had ever been one, it must have fallen long ago, for not a trace of debris or scatteredblocks ever halted my feet. As I reflected, it struck me as distinctly odd that this apparentlyprimordial structure should be so devoid of tumbling masonry, gaps in the walls, and other commonattributes of dilapidation.
What was it? What had it ever been? Of what was it made? Why was there no evidenceof separate blocks in the glassy, bafflingly homogeneous walls? Why were there no traces of doors,either interior or exterior? I knew only that I was in a round, roofless, doorless edifice of somehard, smooth, perfectly transparent, non-refractive, and non-reflective material, an hundred yards indiameter, with many corridors, and with a small circular room at the centre. More than this I couldnever learn from a direct investigation.
I now observed that the sun was sinking very low in the west—a golden-ruddydisc floating in a pool of scarlet and orange above the mist-clouded trees of the horizon.Plainly, I would have to hurry if I expected to choose a sleeping-spot on dry ground before dark. Ihad long before decided to camp for the night on the firm, mossy rim of the plateau near the crestwhence I had first spied the shining crystal, trusting to my usual luck to save me from an attackby the man-lizards. It has always been my contention that we ought to travel in parties of two ormore, so that someone can be on guard during sleeping hours, but the really small number of nightattacks makes the Company careless about such things. Those scaly wretches seem to have difficultyin seeing at night, even with curious glow-torches.
Having picked out again the hallway through which I had come, I started to returnto the structure’s entrance. Additional exploration could wait for another day. Groping acourse as best I could through the spiral corridor—with only general sense, memory, and avague recognition of some of the ill-defined weed patches on the plain as guides—I soon foundmyself once more in close proximity to the corpse. There were now one or two farnoth-flies swoopingover the helmet-covered face, and I knew that decay was setting in. With a futile instinctiveloathing I raised my hand to brush away this vanguard of the scavengers—when a strange andastonishing thing became manifest. An invisible wall, checking the sweep of my arm, told methat—notwithstanding my careful retracing of the way—I had not indeed returned to thecorridor in which the body lay. Instead, I was in a parallel hallway, having no doubt taken somewrong turn or fork among the intricate passages behind.
Hoping to find a doorway to the exit hall ahead, I continued my advance, butpresently came to a blank wall. I would, then, have to return to the central chamber and steer mycourse anew. Exactly where I had made my mistake I could not tell. I glanced at the ground to seeif by any miracle guiding footprints had remained, but at once realised that the thin mud heldimpressions only for a very few moments. There was little difficulty in finding my way to thecentre again, and once there I carefully reflected on the proper outward course. I had kept too farto the right before. This time I must take a more leftward fork somewhere—just where, I coulddecide as I went.
As I groped ahead a second time I felt quite confident of my correctness, anddiverged to the left at a junction I was sure I remembered. The spiralling continued, and I wascareful not to stray into any intersecting passages. Soon, however, I saw to my disgust that I waspassing the body at a considerable distance; this passage evidently reached the outer wall at apoint much beyond it. In the hope that another exit might exist in the half of the wall I had notyet explored, I pressed forward for several paces, but eventually came once more to a solidbarrier. Clearly, the plan of the building was even more complicated than I had thought.
I now debated whether to return to the centre again or whether to try some of thelateral corridors extending toward the body. If I chose this second alternative, I would run therisk of breaking my mental pattern of where I was; hence I had better not attempt it unless I couldthink of some way of leaving a visible trail behind me. Just how to leave a trail would be quite aproblem, and I ransacked my mind for a solution. There seemed to be nothing about my person whichcould leave a mark on anything, nor any material which I could scatter—or minutely subdivideand scatter.
My pen had no effect on the invisible wall, and I could not lay a trail of myprecious food tablets. Even had I been willing to spare the latter, there would not have been evennearly enough—besides which the small pellets would have instantly sunk from sight in the thinmud. I searched my pockets for an old-fashioned notebook—often used unofficially on Venusdespite the quick rotting-rate of paper in the planet’s atmosphere—whose pages I couldtear up and scatter, but could find none. It was obviously impossible to tear the tough, thin metalof this revolving decay-proof record scroll, nor did my clothing offer any possibilities. InVenus’s peculiar atmosphere I could not safely spare my stout leather suit, and underwear hadbeen eliminated because of the climate.
I tried to smear mud on the smooth, invisible walls after squeezing it as dry aspossible, but found that it slipped from sight as quickly as did the height-testing handfuls I hadpreviously thrown. Finally I drew out my knife and attempted to scratch a line on the glassy,phantom surface—something I could recognise with my hand, even though I would not have theadvantage of seeing it from afar. It was useless, however, for the blade made not the slightestimpression on the baffling, unknown material.
Frustrated in all attempts to blaze a trail, I again sought the round centralchamber through memory. It seemed easier to get back to this room than to steer a definite,predetermined course away from it, and I had little difficulty in finding it anew. This time Ilisted on my record scroll every turn I made—drawing a crude hypothetical diagram of my route,and marking all diverging corridors. It was, of course, maddeningly slow work when everything hadto be determined by touch, and the possibilities of error were infinite; but I believed it wouldpay in the long run.
The long twilight of Venus was thick when I reached the central room, but I stillhad hopes of gaining the outside before dark. Comparing my fresh diagram with previousrecollections, I believed I had located my original mistake, so once more set out confidently alongthe invisible hallways. I veered further to the left than during my previous attempts, and triedto keep track of my turnings on the record scroll in case I was still mistaken. In the gatheringdusk I could see the dim line of the corpse, now the centre of a loathsome cloud of farnoth-flies.Before long, no doubt, the mud-dwelling sificlighs would be oozing in from the plain to completethe ghastly work. Approaching the body with some reluctance, I was preparing to step past it when asudden collision with a wall told me I was again astray.
I now realised plainly that I was lost. The complications of this building weretoo much for offhand solution, and I would probably have to do some careful checking before I couldhope to emerge. Still, I was eager to get to dry ground before total darkness set in; hence Ireturned once more to the centre and began a rather aimless series of trials and errors—makingnotes by the light of my electric lamp. When I used this device I noticed with interest that itproduced no reflection—not even the faintest glistening—in the transparent walls aroundme. I was, however, prepared for this; since the sun had at no time formed a gleaming image in thestrange material.
I was still groping about when the dusk became total. A heavy mist obscured mostof the stars and planets, but the earth was plainly visible as a glowing, bluish-green point in thesoutheast. It was just past opposition, and would have been a glorious sight in a telescope. Icould even make out the moon beside it whenever the vapours momentarily thinned. It was nowimpossible to see the corpse—my only landmark—so I blundered back to the central chamberafter a few false turns. After all, I would have to give up hope of sleeping on dry ground. Nothingcould be done till daylight, and I might as well make the best of it here. Lying down in the mudwould not be pleasant, but in my leather suit it could be done. On former expeditions I had sleptunder even worse conditions, and now sheer exhaustion would help to conquer repugnance.
So here I am, squatting in the slime of the central room and making these notes onmy record scroll by the light of the electric lamp. There is something almost humorous in mystrange, unprecedented plight. Lost in a building without doors—a building which I cannot see!I shall doubtless get out early in the morning, and ought to be back at Terra Nova with the crystalby late afternoon. It certainly is a beauty—with surprising lustre even in the feeble light ofthis lamp. I have just had it out examining it. Despite my fatigue, sleep is slow in coming, so Ifind myself writing at great length. I must stop now. Not much danger of being bothered by thosecursed natives in this place. The thing I like least is the corpse—but fortunately my oxygenmask saves me from the worst effects. I am using the chlorate cubes very sparingly. Will take acouple of food tablets now and turn in. More later.

Later—Afternoon, VI, 13

There has been more trouble than I expected. I am still in the building, and willhave to work quickly and wisely if I expect to rest on dry ground tonight. It took me a long timeto get to sleep, and I did not wake till almost noon today. As it was, I would have slept longerbut for the glare of the sun through the haze. The corpse was a rather bad sight—wrigglingwith sificlighs, and with a cloud of farnoth-flies around it. Something had pushed the helmet awayfrom the face, and it was better not to look at it. I was doubly glad of my oxygen mask when Ithought of the situation.
At length I shook and brushed myself dry, took a couple of food tablets, and put anew potassium chlorate cube in the electrolyser of the mask. I am using these cubes slowly, butwish I had a larger supply. I felt much better after my sleep, and expected to get out of thebuilding very shortly.
Consulting the notes and sketches I had jotted down, I was impressed by thecomplexity of the hallways, and by the possibility that I had made a fundamental error. Of the sixopenings leading out of the central space, I had chosen a certain one as that by which I hadentered—using a sighting-arrangement as a guide. When I stood just within the opening, thecorpse fifty yards away was exactly in line with a particular lepidodendron in the far-off forest.Now it occurred to me that this sighting might not have been of sufficient accuracy—thedistance of the corpse making its difference of direction in relation to the horizon comparativelyslight when viewed from the openings next to that of my first ingress. Moreover, the tree did notdiffer as distinctly as it might from other lepidodendra on the horizon.
Putting the matter to a test, I found to my chagrin that I could not be sure whichof three openings was the right one. Had I traversed a different set of windings at each attemptedexit? This time I would be sure. It struck me that despite the impossibility of trailblazing therewas one marker I could leave. Though I could not spare my suit, I could—because of my thickhead of hair—spare my helmet; and this was large and light enough to remain visible above thethin mud. Accordingly I removed the roughly hemispherical device and laid it at the entrance ofone of the corridors—the right-hand one of the three I must try.
I would follow this corridor on the assumption that it was correct; repeating whatI seemed to recall as the proper turns, and constantly consulting and making notes. If I did notget out, I would systematically exhaust all possible variations; and if these failed, I wouldproceed to cover the avenues extending from the next opening in the same way—continuing to thethird opening if necessary. Sooner or later I could not avoid hitting the right path to the exit,but I must use patience. Even at worst, I could scarcely fail to reach the open plain in time for adry night’s sleep.
Immediate results were rather discouraging, though they helped me eliminate theright-hand opening in little more than an hour. Only a succession of blind alleys, each ending at agreat distance from the corpse, seemed to branch from this hallway; and I saw very soon that it hadnot figured at all in the previous afternoon’s wanderings. As before, however, I always foundit relatively easy to grope back to the central chamber.
About 1 p.m. I shifted my helmet marker to the next opening and began to explorethe hallways beyond it. At first I thought I recognised the turnings, but soon found myself in awholly unfamiliar set of corridors. I could not get near the corpse, and this time seemed cut offfrom the central chamber as well, even though I thought I had recorded every move I made. Thereseemed to be tricky twists and crossings too subtle for me to capture in my crude diagrams, and Ibegan to develop a kind of mixed anger and discouragement. While patience would of course win inthe end, I saw that my searching would have to be minute, tireless, and long-continued.
Two o’clock found me still wandering vainly through strangecorridors—constantly feeling my way, looking alternately at my helmet and at the corpse, andjotting data on my scroll with decreasing confidence. I cursed the stupidity and idle curiositywhich had drawn me into this tangle of unseen walls—reflecting that if I had let the thingalone and headed back as soon as I had taken the crystal from the body, I would even now be safe atTerra Nova.
Suddenly it occurred to me that I might be able to tunnel under the invisiblewalls with my knife, and thus effect a short cut to the outside—or to some outward-leadingcorridor. I had no means of knowing how deep the building’s foundations were, but theomnipresent mud argued the absence of any floor save the earth. Facing the distant and increasinglyhorrible corpse, I began a course of feverish digging with the broad, sharp blade.
There was about six inches of semi-liquid mud, below which the density of the soilincreased sharply. This lower soil seemed to be of a different colour—a greyish clay ratherlike the formations near Venus’s north pole. As I continued downward close to the unseenbarrier I saw that the ground was getting harder and harder. Watery mud rushed into the excavationas fast as I removed the clay, but I reached through it and kept on working. If I could bore anykind of a passage beneath the wall, the mud would not stop my wriggling out.
About three feet down, however, the hardness of the soil halted my diggingseriously. Its tenacity was beyond anything I had encountered before, even on this planet, and waslinked with an anomalous heaviness. My knife had to split and chip the tightly packed clay, and thefragments I brought up were like solid stones or bits of metal. Finally even this splitting andchipping became impossible, and I had to cease my work with no lower edge of wall in reach.
The hour-long attempt was a wasteful as well as futile one, for it used up greatstores of my energy and forced me both to take an extra food tablet, and to put an additionalchlorate cube in the oxygen mask. It has also brought a pause in the day’s gropings, for I amstill much too exhausted to walk. After cleaning my hands and arms of the worst of the mud I satdown to write these notes—leaning against an invisible wall and facing away from thecorpse.
That body is simply a writhing mass of vermin now—the odour has begun to drawsome of the slimy akmans from the far-off jungle. I notice that many of the efjeh-weeds on theplain are reaching out necrophagous feelers toward the thing; but I doubt if any are long enough toreach it. I wish some really carnivorous organisms like the skorahs would appear, for then theymight scent me and wriggle a course through the building toward me. Things like that have an oddsense of direction. I could watch them as they came, and jot down their approximate route if theyfailed to form a continuous line. Even that would be a great help. When I met any the pistol wouldmake short work of them.
But I can hardly hope for as much as that. Now that these notes are made I shallrest a while longer, and later will do some more groping. As soon as I get back to the centralchamber—which ought to be fairly easy—I shall try the extreme left-hand opening. PerhapsI can get outside by dusk after all.

Night—VI, 13

New trouble. My escape will be tremendously difficult, for there are elements Ihad not suspected. Another night here in the mud, and a fight on my hands tomorrow. I cut my restshort and was up and groping again by four o’clock. After about fifteen minutes I reached thecentral chamber and moved my helmet to mark the last of the three possible doorways. Startingthrough this opening, I seemed to find the going more familiar, but was brought up short in lessthan five minutes by a sight that jolted me more than I can describe.
It was a group of four or five of those detestable man-lizards emerging from theforest far off across the plain. I could not see them distinctly at that distance, but thought theypaused and turned toward the trees to gesticulate, after which they were joined by fully a dozenmore. The augmented party now began to advance directly toward the invisible building, and as theyapproached I studied them carefully. I had never before had a close view of the things outside thesteamy shadows of the jungle.
The resemblance to reptiles was perceptible, though I knew it was only an apparentone, since these beings have no point of contact with terrestrial life. When they drew nearer theyseemed less truly reptilian—only the flat head and the green, slimy, frog-like skin carryingout the idea. They walked erect on their odd, thick stumps, and their suction-discs made curiousnoises in the mud. These were average specimens, about seven feet in height, and with four long,ropy pectoral tentacles. The motions of those tentacles—if the theories of Fogg, Ekberg, andJanat are right, which I formerly doubted but am now more ready to believe—indicated that thethings were in animated conversation.
I drew my flame pistol and was ready for a hard fight. The odds were bad, but theweapon gave me a certain advantage. If the things knew this building they would come through itafter me, and in this way would form a key to getting out, just as carnivorous skorahs might havedone. That they would attack me seemed certain; for even though they could not see the crystal inmy pouch, they could divine its presence through that special sense of theirs.
Yet, surprisingly enough, they did not attack me. Instead they scattered andformed a vast circle around me—at a distance which indicated that they were pressing close tothe unseen wall. Standing there in a ring, the beings stared silently and inquisitively at me,waving their tentacles and sometimes nodding their heads and gesturing with their upper limbs.After a while I saw others issue from the forest, and these advanced and joined the curious crowd.Those near the corpse looked briefly at it but made no move to disturb it. It was a horrible sight,yet the man-lizards seemed quite unconcerned. Now and then one of them would brush away thefarnoth-flies with its limbs or tentacles, or crush a wriggling sificligh or akman, or anout-reaching efjeh-weed, with the suction discs on its stumps.
Staring back at these grotesque and unexpected intruders, and wondering uneasilywhy they did not attack me at once, I lost for the time being the will power and nervous energy tocontinue my search for a way out. Instead I leaned limply against the invisible wall of the passagewhere I stood, letting my wonder merge gradually into a chain of the wildest speculations. Anhundred mysteries which had previously baffled me seemed all at once to take on a new and sinistersignificance, and I trembled with an acute fear unlike anything I had experienced before.
I believed I knew why these repulsive beings were hovering expectantly around me.I believed, too, that I had the secret of the transparent structure at last. The alluring crystalwhich I had seized, the body of the man who had seized it before me—all these things began toacquire a dark and threatening meaning.
It was no common series of mischances which had made me lose my way in thisroofless, unseen tangle of corridors. Far from it. Beyond doubt, the place was a genuinemaze—a labyrinth deliberately built by these hellish beings whose craft and mentality I had sobadly underestimated. Might I not have suspected this before, knowing of their uncannyarchitectural skill? The purpose was all too plain. It was a trap—a trap set to catch humanbeings, and with the crystal spheroid as bait. These reptilian things, in their war on the takersof crystals, had turned to strategy and were using our own cupidity against us.
Dwight—if this rotting corpse were indeed he—was a victim. He must havebeen trapped some time ago, and had failed to find his way out. Lack of water had doubtlessmaddened him, and perhaps he had run out of chlorate cubes as well. Probably his mask had notslipped accidentally after all. Suicide was a likelier thing. Rather than face a lingering death hehad solved the issue by removing the mask deliberately and letting the lethal atmosphere do itswork at once. The horrible irony of his fate lay in his position—only a few feet from thesaving exit he had failed to find. One minute more of searching and he would have been safe.
And now I was trapped as he had been. Trapped, and with this circling herd ofcurious starers to mock at my predicament. The thought was maddening, and as it sank in I wasseized with a sudden flash of panic which set me running aimlessly through the unseen hallways. Forseveral moments I was essentially a maniac—stumbling, tripping, bruising myself on theinvisible walls, and finally collapsing in the mud as a panting, lacerated heap of mindless,bleeding flesh.
The fall sobered me a bit, so that when I slowly struggled to my feet I couldnotice things and exercise my reason. The circling watchers were swaying their tentacles in an odd,irregular way suggestive of sly, alien laughter, and I shook my fist savagely at them as I rose. Mygesture seemed to increase their hideous mirth—a few of them clumsily imitating it with theirgreenish upper limbs. Shamed into sense, I tried to collect my faculties and take stock of thesituation.
After all, I was not as badly off as Dwight had been. Unlike him, I knew what thesituation was—and forewarned is forearmed. I had proof that the exit was attainable in theend, and would not repeat his tragic act of impatient despair. The body—or skeleton, as itwould soon be—was constantly before me as a guide to the sought-for aperture, and doggedpatience would certainly take me to it if I worked long and intelligently enough.
I had, however, the disadvantage of being surrounded by these reptilian devils.Now that I realised the nature of the trap—whose invisible material argued a science andtechnology beyond anything on earth—I could no longer discount the mentality and resources ofmy enemies. Even with my flame pistol I would have a bad time getting away—though boldnessand quickness would doubtless see me through in the long run.
But first I must reach the exterior—unless I could lure or provoke some ofthe creatures to advance toward me. As I prepared my pistol for action and counted over my generoussupply of ammunition it occurred to me to try the effect of its blasts on the invisible walls. HadI overlooked a feasible means of escape? There was no clue to the chemical composition of thetransparent barrier, and conceivably it might be something which a tongue of fire could cut likecheese. Choosing a section facing the corpse, I carefully discharged the pistol at close range andfelt with my knife where the blast had been aimed. Nothing was changed. I had seen the flame spreadwhen it struck the surface, and now I realised that my hope had been vain. Only a long, tedioussearch for the exit would ever bring me to the outside.
So, swallowing another food tablet and putting another cube in the electrolyser ofmy mask, I recommenced the long quest; retracing my steps to the central chamber and starting outanew. I constantly consulted my notes and sketches, and made fresh ones—taking one false turnafter another, but staggering on in desperation till the afternoon light grew very dim. As Ipersisted in my quest I looked from time to time at the silent circle of mocking starers, andnoticed a gradual replacement in their ranks. Every now and then a few would return to the forest,while others would arrive to take their places. The more I thought of their tactics the less Iliked them, for they gave me a hint of the creatures’ possible motives. At any time thesedevils could have advanced and fought me, but they seemed to prefer watching my struggles toescape. I could not but infer that they enjoyed the spectacle—and this made me shrink withdouble force from the prospect of falling into their hands.
With the dark I ceased my searching, and sat down in the mud to rest. Now I amwriting in the light of my lamp, and will soon try to get some sleep. I hope tomorrow will see meout; for my canteen is low, and lacol tablets are a poor substitute for water. I would hardly dareto try the moisture in this slime, for none of the water in the mud-regions is potable except whendistilled. That is why we run such long pipe lines to the yellow clay regions—or depend onrain-water when those devils find and cut our pipes. I have none too many chlorate cubes either,and must try to cut down my oxygen consumption as much as I can. My tunnelling attempt of the earlyafternoon, and my later panic flight, burned up a perilous amount of air. Tomorrow I will reducephysical exertion to the barest minimum until I meet the reptiles and have to deal with them. Imust have a good cube supply for the journey back to Terra Nova. My enemies are still on hand; Ican see a circle of their feeble glow-torches around me. There is a horror about those lights whichwill keep me awake.

Night—VI, 14

Another full day of searching and still no way out! I am beginning to be worriedabout the water problem, for my canteen went dry at noon. In the afternoon there was a burst ofrain, and I went back to the central chamber for the helmet which I had left as a marker—usingthis as a bowl and getting about two cupfuls of water. I drank most of it, but have put the slightremainder in my canteen. Lacol tablets make little headway against real thirst, and I hope therewill be more rain in the night. I am leaving my helmet bottom up to catch any that falls. Foodtablets are none too plentiful, but not dangerously low. I shall halve my rations from now on. Thechlorate cubes are my real worry, for even without violent exercise the day’s endless trampingburned a dangerous number. I feel weak from my forced economies in oxygen, and from my constantlymounting thirst. When I reduce my food I suppose I shall feel still weaker.
There is something damnable—something uncanny—about this labyrinth. Icould swear that I had eliminated certain turns through charting, and yet each new trial beliessome assumption I had thought established. Never before did I realise how lost we are withoutvisual landmarks. A blind man might do better—but for most of us sight is the king of thesenses. The effect of all these fruitless wanderings is one of profound discouragement. I canunderstand how poor Dwight must have felt. His corpse is now just a skeleton, and the sificlighsand akmans and farnoth-flies are gone. The efjeh-weeds are nipping the leather clothing to pieces,for they were longer and faster-growing than I had expected. And all the while those relays oftentacled starers stand gloatingly around the barrier laughing at me and enjoying my misery.Another day and I shall go mad if I do not drop dead from exhaustion.
However, there is nothing to do but persevere. Dwight would have got out if he hadkept on a minute longer. It is just possible that somebody from Terra Nova will come looking for mebefore long, although this is only my third day out. My muscles ache horribly, and I can’tseem to rest at all lying down in this loathsome mud. Last night, despite my terrific fatigue, Islept only fitfully, and tonight I fear will be no better. I live in an endlessnightmare—poised between waking and sleeping, yet neither truly awake nor truly asleep. Myhand shakes, I can write no more for the time being. That circle of feeble glow-torches ishideous.

Late Afternoon—VI, 15

Substantial progress! Looks good. Very weak, and did not sleep much till daylight.Then I dozed till noon, though without being at all rested. No rain, and thirst leaves me veryweak. Ate an extra food tablet to keep me going, but without water it didn’t help much. Idared to try a little of the slime water just once, but it made me violently sick and left me eventhirstier than before. Must save chlorate cubes, so am nearly suffocating for lack of oxygen.Can’t walk much of the time, but manage to crawl in the mud. About 2 p.m. I thought Irecognised some passages, and got substantially nearer to the corpse—or skeleton—than Ihad been since the first day’s trials. I was sidetracked once in a blind alley, but recoveredthe main trail with the aid of my chart and notes. The trouble with these jottings is that thereare so many of them. They must cover three feet of the record scroll, and I have to stop for longperiods to untangle them.
My head is weak from thirst, suffocation, and exhaustion, and I cannot understandall I have set down. Those damnable green things keep staring and laughing with their tentacles,and sometimes they gesticulate in a way that makes me think they share some terrible joke justbeyond my perception.
It was three o’clock when I really struck my stride. There was a doorwaywhich, according to my notes, I had not traversed before; and when I tried it I found I could crawlcircuitously toward the weed-twined skeleton. The route was a sort of spiral, much like that bywhich I had first reached the central chamber. Whenever I came to a lateral doorway or junction Iwould keep to the course which seemed best to repeat that original journey. As I circled nearer andnearer to my gruesome landmark, the watchers outside intensified their cryptic gesticulations andsardonic silent laughter. Evidently they saw something grimly amusing in myprogress—perceiving no doubt how helpless I would be in any encounter with them. I was contentto leave them to their mirth; for although I realised my extreme weakness, I counted on the flamepistol and its numerous extra magazines to get me through the vile reptilian phalanx.
Hope now soared high, but I did not attempt to rise to my feet. Better to crawl now,and save my strength for the coming encounter with the man-lizards. My advance was very slow, andthe danger of straying into some blind alley very great, but none the less I seemed to curve steadilytoward my osseous goal. The prospect gave me new strength, and for the nonce I ceased to worryabout my pain, my thirst, and my scant supply of cubes. The creatures were now all massing aroundthe entrance—gesturing, leaping, and laughing with their tentacles. Soon, I reflected, I wouldhave to face the entire horde—and perhaps such reinforcements as they would receive from theforest.
I am now only a few yards from the skeleton, and am pausing to make this entrybefore emerging and breaking through the noxious band of entities. I feel confident that with mylast ounce of strength I can put them to flight despite their numbers, for the range of this pistolis tremendous. Then a camp on the dry moss at the plateau’s edge, and in the morning a wearytrip through the jungle to Terra Nova. I shall be glad to see living men and the buildings of humanbeings again. The teeth of that skull gleam and grin horribly.

Toward Night—VI, 15

Horror and despair. Baffled again! After making the previous entry I approachedstill closer to the skeleton, but suddenly encountered an intervening wall. I had been deceivedonce more, and was apparently back where I had been three days before, on my first futile attemptto leave the labyrinth Whether I screamed aloud I do not know—perhaps I was too weak to uttera sound. I merely lay dazed in the mud for a long period, while the greenish things outside leapedand laughed and gestured.
After a time I became more fully conscious. My thirst and weakness and suffocationwere fast gaining on me, and with my last bit of strength I put a new cube in theelectrolyser—recklessly, and without regard for the needs of my journey to Terra Nova. Thefresh oxygen revived me slightly, and enabled me to look about more alertly.
It seemed as if I were slightly more distant from poor Dwight than I had been atthat first disappointment, and I dully wondered if I could be in some other corridor a trifle moreremote. With this faint shadow of hope I laboriously dragged myself forward—but after a fewfeet encountered a dead end as I had on the former occasion.
This, then, was the end. Three days had taken me nowhere, and my strength wasgone. I would soon go mad from thirst, and I could no longer count on cubes enough to get me back.I feebly wondered why the nightmare things had gathered so thickly around the entrance as theymocked me. Probably this was part of the mockery—to make me think I was approaching an egresswhich they knew did not exist.
I shall not last long, though I am resolved not to hasten matters as Dwight did.His grinning skull has just turned toward me, shifted by the groping of one of the efjeh-weeds thatare devouring his leather suit. The ghoulish stare of those empty eye-sockets is worse than thestaring of those lizard horrors. It lends a hideous meaning to that dead, white-toothed grin.
I shall lie very still in the mud and save all the strength I can. Thisrecord—which I hope may reach and warn those who come after me—will soon be done. After Istop writing I shall rest a long while. Then, when it is too dark for those frightful creatures tosee, I shall muster up my last reserves of strength and try to toss the record scroll over the walland the intervening corridor to the plain outside. I shall take care to send it toward the left,where it will not hit the leaping band of mocking beleaguerers. Perhaps it will be lost forever inthe thin mud—but perhaps it will land in some widespread clump of weeds and ultimately reachthe hands of men.
If it does survive to be read, I hope it may do more than merely warn men of thistrap. I hope it may teach our race to let those shining crystals stay where they are. They belongto Venus alone. Our planet does not truly need them, and I believe we have violated some obscureand mysterious law—some law buried deep in the arcana of the cosmos—in our attempts totake them. Who can tell what dark, potent, and widespread forces spur on these reptilian things whoguard their treasure so strangely? Dwight and I have paid, as others have paid and will pay. But itmay be that these scattered deaths are only the prelude of greater horrors to come. Let us leave toVenus that which belongs only to Venus.

*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*

I am very neardeath now, and fear I may not be able to throw the scroll when dusk comes. If I cannot, I supposethe man-lizards will seize it, for they will probably realise what it is. They will not wish anyoneto be warned of the labyrinth—and they will not know that my message holds a plea in their ownbehalf. As the end approaches I feel more kindly toward the things. In the scale of cosmic entitywho can say which species stands higher, or more nearly approaches a space-wide organicnorm—theirs or mine?

*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*

I have just taken the great crystal out of my pouch to look at in my last moments.It shines fiercely and menacingly in the red rays of the dying day. The leaping horde have noticedit, and their gestures have changed in a way I cannot understand. I wonder why they keep clusteredaround the entrance instead of concentrating at a still closer point in the transparent wall.

*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*

I am growing numb and cannot write much more. Things whirl around me, yet I do notlose consciousness. Can I throw this over the wall? That crystal glows so, yet the twilight isdeepening.

*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*

Dark. Very weak. They are still laughing and leaping around the doorway, and havestarted those hellish glow-torches.

*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*

Are they going away? I dreamed I heard a sound&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. light in thesky.

*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*

 
REPORT OF WESLEY P.MILLER, SUPT. GROUP A,
VENUS CRYSTAL CO.


(Terra Nova on Venus—VI, 16)

Our Operative A-49, Kenton J. Stanfield of 5317 Marshall Street, Richmond, Va.,left Terra Nova early on VI, 12, for a short-term trip indicated by detector. Due back 13th or14th. Did not appear by evening of 15th, so Scouting Plane FR-58 with five men under my command setout at 8 p.m. to follow route with detector. Needle shewed no change from earlier readings.
Followed needle to Erycinian Highland, played strong searchlights all the way.Triple-range flame-guns and D-radiation-cylinders could have dispersed any ordinary hostile forceof natives, or any dangerous aggregation of carnivorous skorahs.
When over the open plain on Eryx we saw a group of moving lights which we knewwere native glow-torches. As we approached, they scattered into the forest. Probably 75 to 100 inall. Detector indicated crystal on spot where they had been. Sailing low over this spot, our lightspicked out objects on the ground. Skeleton tangled in efjeh-weeds, and complete body ten feet fromit. Brought plane down near bodies, and corner of wing crashed on unseen obstruction.
Approaching bodies on foot, we came up short against a smooth, invisible barrierwhich puzzled us enormously. Feeling along it near the skeleton, we struck an opening, beyond whichwas a space with another opening leading to the skeleton. The latter, though robbed of clothing byweeds, had one of the company’s numbered metal helmets beside it. It was Operative B-9,Frederick N. Dwight of Koenig’s division, who had been out of Terra Nova for two months on along commission.
Between this skeleton and the complete body there seemed to be another wall, butwe could easily identify the second man as Stanfield. He had a record scroll in his left hand and apen in his right, and seemed to have been writing when he died. No crystal was visible, but thedetector indicated a huge specimen near Stanfield’s body.
We had great difficulty in getting at Stanfield, but finally succeeded. The bodywas still warm, and a great crystal lay beside it, covered by the shallow mud. We at once studiedthe record scroll in the left hand, and prepared to take certain steps based on its data. Thecontents of the scroll forms the long narrative prefixed to this report; a narrative whose maindescriptions we have verified, and which we append as an explanation of what was found. The laterparts of this account shew mental decay, but there is no reason to doubt the bulk of it. Stanfieldobviously died of a combination of thirst, suffocation, cardiac strain, and psychologicaldepression. His mask was in place, and freely generating oxygen despite an alarmingly low cubesupply.
Our plane being damaged, we sent a wireless and called out Anderson with RepairPlane FG-7, a crew of wreckers, and a set of blasting materials. By morning FR-58 was fixed, andwent back under Anderson carrying the two bodies and the crystal. We shall bury Dwight andStanfield in the company graveyard, and ship the crystal to Chicago on the next earth-bound liner.Later, we shall adopt Stanfield’s suggestion—the sound one in the saner, earlier part ofhis report—and bring across enough troops to wipe out the natives altogether. With a clearfield, there can be scarcely any limit to the amount of crystal we can secure.
In the afternoon we studied the invisible building or trap with great care,exploring it with the aid of long guiding cords, and preparing a complete chart for our archives.We were much impressed by the design, and shall keep specimens of the substance for chemicalanalysis. All such knowledge will be useful when we take over the various cities of the natives.Our type C diamond drills were able to bite into the unseen material, and wreckers are now plantingdynamite preparatory to a thorough blasting. Nothing will be left when we are done. The edificeforms a distinct menace to aërial and other possible traffic.
In considering the plan of the labyrinth one is impressed not only with the ironyof Dwight’s fate, but with that of Stanfield’s as well. When trying to reach the secondbody from the skeleton, we could find no access on the right, but Markheim found a doorway from thefirst inner space some fifteen feet past Dwight and four or five past Stanfield. Beyond this was along hall which we did not explore till later, but on the right-hand side of that hall was anotherdoorway leading directly to the body. Stanfield could have reached the outside entrance by walking22 or 23 feet if he had found the opening which lay directly behind him—an openingwhich he overlooked in his exhaustion and despair.
