Chapter I.
A Simple Rustic Maid


Ermengarde Stubbs was the beauteous blonde daughter of Hiram Stubbs, a poor but honest farmer-bootleggerof Hogton, Vt. Her name was originally Ethyl Ermengarde, but her father persuaded her to dropthe praenomen after the passage of the 18th Amendment, averring that it made him thirsty byreminding him of ethyl alcohol, C2H5OH.His own products contained mostly methyl or wood alcohol, CH3OH.Ermengarde confessed to sixteen summers, and branded as mendacious all reports to the effectthat she was thirty. She had large black eyes, a prominent Roman nose, light hair which wasnever dark at the roots except when the local drug store was short on supplies, and a beautifulbut inexpensive complexion. She was about 5ft 5.33...in tall, weighed 115.47 lbs. on her father’s corn scales—alsooff them—and was adjudged most lovely by all the village swains who admired her father’sfarm and liked his liquid crops.
Ermengarde’s hand was sought in matrimony by two ardent lovers. ’SquireHardman, who had a mortgage on the old home, was very rich and elderly. He was dark and cruellyhandsome, and always rode horseback and carried a riding-crop. Long had he sought the radiantErmengarde, and now his ardour was fanned to fever heat by a secret known to him alone—forupon the humble acres of Farmer Stubbs he had discovered a vein of rich GOLD!!“Aha!” said he, “I will win the maiden ere her parent knows of his unsuspectedwealth, and join to my fortune a greater fortune still!” And so he began to call twicea week instead of once as before.
But alas for the sinister designs of a villain—’Squire Hardmanwas not the only suitor for the fair one. Close by the village dwelt another—the handsomeJack Manly, whose curly yellow hair had won the sweet Ermengarde’s affection when bothwere toddling youngsters at the village school. Jack had long been too bashful to declare hispassion, but one day while strolling along a shady lane by the old mill with Ermengarde, hehad found courage to utter that which was within his heart.
“O light of my life,” said he, “my soul is so overburdenedthat I must speak! Ermengarde, my ideal [he pronounced it i-deel!], life has become an emptything without you. Beloved of my spirit, behold a suppliant kneeling in the dust before thee.Ermengarde—oh, Ermengarde, raise me to an heaven of joy and say that you will some daybe mine! It is true that I am poor, but have I not youth and strength to fight my way to fame?This I can do only for you, dear Ethyl—pardon me, Ermengarde—my only, my most precious—”but here he paused to wipe his eyes and mop his brow, and the fair responded:
“Jack—my angel—at last—I mean, this is so unexpectedand quite unprecedented! I had never dreamed that you entertained sentiments of affection inconnexion with one so lowly as Farmer Stubbs’ child—for I am still but a child!Such is your natural nobility that I had feared—I mean thought—you would be blindto such slight charms as I possess, and that you would seek your fortune in the great city;there meeting and wedding one of those more comely damsels whose splendour we observe in fashionbooks.
“But, Jack, since it is really I whom you adore, let us waive all needlesscircumlocution. Jack—my darling—my heart has long been susceptible to your manlygraces. I cherish an affection for thee—consider me thine own and be sure to buy the ringat Perkins’ hardware store where they have such nice imitation diamonds in the window.”
“Ermengarde, me love!”
“Jack—my precious!”
“My darling!”
“My own!”
“My Gawd!”

[Curtain]


Chapter II.
And the Villain Still Pursued Her


But these tender passages, sacred though their fervour, did not pass unobservedby profane eyes; for crouched in the bushes and gritting his teeth was the dastardly ’SquireHardman! When the lovers had finally strolled away he leapt out into the lane, viciously twirlinghis moustache and riding-crop, and kicking an unquestionably innocent cat who was also out strolling.
“Curses!” he cried—Hardman, not the cat—“I amfoiled in my plot to get the farm and the girl! But Jack Manly shall never succeed! I am a manof power—and we shall see!”
Thereupon he repaired to the humble Stubbs’ cottage, where he found thefond father in the still-cellar washing bottles under the supervision of the gentle wife andmother, Hannah Stubbs. Coming directly to the point, the villain spoke:
“Farmer Stubbs, I cherish a tender affection of long standing for yourlovely offspring, Ethyl Ermengarde. I am consumed with love, and wish her hand in matrimony.Always a man of few words, I will not descend to euphemism. Give me the girl or I will foreclosethe mortgage and take the old home!”
“But, Sir,” pleaded the distracted Stubbs while his stricken spousemerely glowered, “I am sure the child’s affections are elsewhere placed.”
“She must be mine!” sternly snapped the sinister ’squire.“I will make her love me—none shall resist my will! Either she becomes muh wifeor the old homestead goes!”
And with a sneer and flick of his riding-crop ’Squire Hardman strodeout into the night.
Scarce had he departed, when there entered by the back door the radiant lovers,eager to tell the senior Stubbses of their new-found happiness. Imagine the universal consternationwhich reigned when all was known! Tears flowed like white ale, till suddenly Jack rememberedhe was the hero and raised his head, declaiming in appropriately virile accents:
“Never shall the fair Ermengarde be offered up to this beast as a sacrificewhile I live! I shall protect her—she is mine, mine, mine—and then some! Fear not,dear father and mother to be—I will defend you all! You shall have the old home still[adverb, not noun—although Jack was by no means out of sympathy with Stubbs’ kindof farm produce] and I shall lead to the altar the beauteous Ermengarde, loveliest of her sex!To perdition with the crool ’squire and his ill-gotten gold—the right shall alwayswin, and a hero is always in the right! I will go to the great city and there make a fortuneto save you all ere the mortgage fall due! Farewell, my love—I leave you now in tears,but I shall return to pay off the mortgage and claim you as my bride!”
“Jack, my protector!”
“Ermie, my tootsie roll!”
“Dearest!”
“Darling!—and don’t forget that ring at Perkins’.”
“Oh!”
“Ah!”

[Curtain]


Chapter III.
A Dastardly Act


But the resourceful ’Squire Hardman was not so easily to be foiled. Closeby the village lay a disreputable settlement of unkempt shacks, populated by a shiftless scumwho lived by thieving and other odd jobs. Here the devilish villain secured two accomplices—ill-favouredfellows who were very clearly no gentlemen. And in the night the evil three broke into the Stubbscottage and abducted the fair Ermengarde, taking her to a wretched hovel in the settlement andplacing her under the charge of Mother Maria, a hideous old hag. Farmer Stubbs was quite distracted,and would have advertised in the papers if the cost had been less than a cent a word for eachinsertion. Ermengarde was firm, and never wavered in her refusal to wed the villain.
“Aha, my proud beauty,” quoth he, “I have ye in me power,and sooner or later I will break that will of thine! Meanwhile think of your poor old fatherand mother as turned out of hearth and home and wandering helpless through the meadows!”
“Oh, spare them, spare them!” said the maiden.
“Neverr&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ha ha ha ha!” leered the brute.
And so the cruel days sped on, while all in ignorance young Jack Manly wasseeking fame and fortune in the great city.

Chapter IV.
Subtle Villainy


One day as ’Squire Hardman sat in the front parlour of his expensiveand palatial home, indulging in his favourite pastime of gnashing his teeth and swishing hisriding-crop, a great thought came to him; and he cursed aloud at the statue of Satan on theonyx mantelpiece.
“Fool that I am!” he cried. “Why did I ever waste all thistrouble on the girl when I can get the farm by simply foreclosing? I never thought of that!I will let the girl go, take the farm, and be free to wed some fair city maid like the leadinglady of that burlesque troupe which played last week at the Town Hall!”
And so he went down to the settlement, apologised to Ermengarde, let her gohome, and went home himself to plot new crimes and invent new modes of villainy.
The days wore on, and the Stubbses grew very sad over the coming loss of theirhome and still but nobody seemed able to do anything about it. One day a party of hunters fromthe city chanced to stray over the old farm, and one of them found the gold!! Hiding his discoveryfrom his companions, he feigned rattlesnake-bite and went to the Stubbs’ cottage for aidof the usual kind. Ermengarde opened the door and saw him. He also saw her, and in that momentresolved to win her and the gold. “For my old mother’s sake I must”—hecried loudly to himself. “No sacrifice is too great!”

Chapter V.
The City Chap


Algernon Reginald Jones was a polished man of the world from the great city,and in his sophisticated hands our poor little Ermengarde was as a mere child. One could almostbelieve that sixteen-year-old stuff. Algy was a fast worker, but never crude. He could havetaught Hardman a thing or two about finesse in sheiking. Thus only a week after his advent tothe Stubbs family circle, where he lurked like the vile serpent that he was, he had persuadedthe heroine to elope! It was in the night that she went leaving a note for her parents, sniffingthe familiar mash for the last time, and kissing the cat goodbye—touching stuff! On thetrain Algernon became sleepy and slumped down in his seat, allowing a paper to fall out of hispocket by accident. Ermengarde, taking advantage of her supposed position as a bride-elect,picked up the folded sheet and read its perfumed expanse—when lo! she almost fainted!It was a love letter from another woman!!
“Perfidious deceiver!” she whispered at the sleeping Algernon,“so this is all that your boasted fidelity amounts to! I am done with you for all eternity!”
So saying, she pushed him out the window and settled down for a much neededrest.

Chapter VI.
Alone in the Great City


When the noisy train pulled into the dark station at the city, poor helplessErmengarde was all alone without the money to get back to Hogton. “Oh why,” shesighed in innocent regret, “didn’t I take his pocketbook before I pushed him out?Oh well, I should worry! He told me all about the city so I can easily earn enough to get homeif not to pay off the mortgage!”
But alas for our little heroine—work is not easy for a greenhorn to secure,so for a week she was forced to sleep on park benches and obtain food from the bread-line. Oncea wily and wicked person, perceiving her helplessness, offered her a position as dish-washerin a fashionable and depraved cabaret; but our heroine was true to her rustic ideals and refusedto work in such a gilded and glittering palace of frivolity—especially since she was offeredonly $3.00 per week with meals but no board. She tried to look up Jack Manly, her one-time lover,but he was nowhere to be found. Perchance, too, he would not have known her; for in her povertyshe had perforce become a brunette again, and Jack had not beheld her in that state since schooldays. One day she found a neat but costly purse in the park; and after seeing that there wasnot much in it, took it to the rich lady whose card proclaimed her ownership. Delighted beyondwords at the honesty of this forlorn waif, the aristocratic Mrs. Van Itty adopted Ermengardeto replace the little one who had been stolen from her so many years ago. “How like myprecious Maude,” she sighed, as she watched the fair brunette return to blondeness. Andso several weeks passed, with the old folks at home tearing their hair and the wicked ’SquireHardman chuckling devilishly.

Chapter VII.
Happy Ever Afterward


One day the wealthy heiress Ermengarde S. Van Itty hired a new second assistantchauffeur. Struck by something familiar in his face, she looked again and gasped. Lo! it wasnone other than the perfidious Algernon Reginald Jones, whom she had pushed from a car windowon that fateful day! He had survived—this much was almost immediately evident. Also, hehad wed the other woman, who had run away with the milkman and all the money in the house. Nowwholly humbled, he asked forgiveness of our heroine, and confided to her the whole tale of thegold on her father’s farm. Moved beyond words, she raised his salary a dollar a monthand resolved to gratify at last that always unquenchable anxiety to relieve the worry of theold folks. So one bright day Ermengarde motored back to Hogton and arrived at the farm justas ’Squire Hardman was foreclosing the mortgage and ordering the old folks out.
“Stay, villain!” she cried, flashing a colossal roll of bills.“You are foiled at last! Here is your money—now go, and never darken our humbledoor again!”
Then followed a joyous reunion, whilst the ’squire twisted his moustacheand riding-crop in bafflement and dismay. But hark! What is this? Footsteps sound on the oldgravel walk, and who should appear but our hero, Jack Manly—worn and seedy, but radiantof face. Seeking at once the downcast villain, he said:
“’Squire—lend me a ten-spot, will you? I have just come backfrom the city with my beauteous bride, the fair Bridget Goldstein, and need something to startthings on the old farm.” Then turning to the Stubbses, he apologised for his inabilityto pay off the mortgage as agreed.
“Don’t mention it,” said Ermengarde, “prosperity hascome to us, and I will consider it sufficient payment if you will forget forever the foolishfancies of our childhood.”
All this time Mrs. Van Itty had been sitting in the motor waiting for Ermengarde;but as she lazily eyed the sharp-faced Hannah Stubbs a vague memory started from the back ofher brain. Then it all came to her, and she shrieked accusingly at the agrestic matron.
“You—you—Hannah Smith—I know you now! Twenty-eightyears ago you were my baby Maude’s nurse and stole her from the cradle!! Where, oh, whereis my child?” Then a thought came as the lightning in a murky sky. “Ermengarde—yousay she is your daughter.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She is mine! Fate has restored to me myold chee-ild—my tiny Maudie!—Ermengarde—Maude—come to your mother’sloving arms!!!”
But Ermengarde was doing some tall thinking. How could she get away with thesixteen-year-old stuff if she had been stolen twenty-eight years ago? And if she was not Stubbs’daughter the gold would never be hers. Mrs. Van Itty was rich, but ’Squire Hardman wasricher. So, approaching the dejected villain, she inflicted upon him the last terrible punishment.
“’Squire, dear,” she murmured, “I have reconsideredall. I love you and your naive strength. Marry me at once or I will have you prosecuted forthat kidnapping last year. Foreclose your mortgage and enjoy with me the gold your clevernessdiscovered. Come, dear!” And the poor dub did.

THE END.
