“Sedibus ut saltem placidis in morte quiescam.”
            —Virgil.                  

In relating the circumstances which have led to my confinement within this refuge for the demented,I am aware that my present position will create a natural doubt of the authenticity of my narrative.It is an unfortunate fact that the bulk of humanity is too limited in its mental vision to weighwith patience and intelligence those isolated phenomena, seen and felt only by a psychologicallysensitive few, which lie outside its common experience. Men of broader intellect know that thereis no sharp distinction betwixt the real and the unreal; that all things appear as they do onlyby virtue of the delicate individual physical and mental media through which we are made consciousof them; but the prosaic materialism of the majority condemns as madness the flashes of super-sightwhich penetrate the common veil of obvious empiricism.
My name is Jervas Dudley, and from earliest childhood I have been a dreamerand a visionary. Wealthy beyond the necessity of a commercial life, and temperamentally unfittedfor the formal studies and social recreations of my acquaintances, I have dwelt ever in realmsapart from the visible world; spending my youth and adolescence in ancient and little-knownbooks, and in roaming the fields and groves of the region near my ancestral home. I do not thinkthat what I read in these books or saw in these fields and groves was exactly what other boysread and saw there; but of this I must say little, since detailed speech would but confirm thosecruel slanders upon my intellect which I sometimes overhear from the whispers of the stealthyattendants around me. It is sufficient for me to relate events without analysing causes.
I have said that I dwelt apart from the visible world, but I have not saidthat I dwelt alone. This no human creature may do; for lacking the fellowship of the living,he inevitably draws upon the companionship of things that are not, or are no longer, living.Close by my home there lies a singular wooded hollow, in whose twilight deeps I spent most ofmy time; reading, thinking, and dreaming. Down its moss-covered slopes my first steps of infancywere taken, and around its grotesquely gnarled oak trees my first fancies of boyhood were woven.Well did I come to know the presiding dryads of those trees, and often have I watched theirwild dances in the struggling beams of a waning moon—but of these things I must not nowspeak. I will tell only of the lone tomb in the darkest of the hillside thickets; the desertedtomb of the Hydes, an old and exalted family whose last direct descendant had been laid withinits black recesses many decades before my birth.
The vault to which I refer is of ancient granite, weathered and discolouredby the mists and dampness of generations. Excavated back into the hillside, the structure isvisible only at the entrance. The door, a ponderous and forbidding slab of stone, hangs uponrusted iron hinges, and is fastened ajar in a queerly sinister way by means of heavyiron chains and padlocks, according to a gruesome fashion of half a century ago. The abode ofthe race whose scions are here inurned had once crowned the declivity which holds the tomb,but had long since fallen victim to the flames which sprang up from a disastrous stroke of lightning.Of the midnight storm which destroyed this gloomy mansion, the older inhabitants of the regionsometimes speak in hushed and uneasy voices; alluding to what they call “divine wrath”in a manner that in later years vaguely increased the always strong fascination which I feltfor the forest-darkened sepulchre. One man only had perished in the fire. When the last of theHydes was buried in this place of shade and stillness, the sad urnful of ashes had come froma distant land; to which the family had repaired when the mansion burned down. No one remainsto lay flowers before the granite portal, and few care to brave the depressing shadows whichseem to linger strangely about the water-worn stones.
I shall never forget the afternoon when first I stumbled upon the half-hiddenhouse of death. It was in mid-summer, when the alchemy of Nature transmutes the sylvan landscapeto one vivid and almost homogeneous mass of green; when the senses are well-nigh intoxicatedwith the surging seas of moist verdure and the subtly indefinable odours of the soil and thevegetation. In such surroundings the mind loses its perspective; time and space become trivialand unreal, and echoes of a forgotten prehistoric past beat insistently upon the enthralledconsciousness. All day I had been wandering through the mystic groves of the hollow; thinkingthoughts I need not discuss, and conversing with things I need not name. In years a child often, I had seen and heard many wonders unknown to the throng; and was oddly aged in certainrespects. When, upon forcing my way between two savage clumps of briers, I suddenly encounteredthe entrance of the vault, I had no knowledge of what I had discovered. The dark blocks of granite,the door so curiously ajar, and the funereal carvings above the arch, aroused in me no associationsof mournful or terrible character. Of graves and tombs I knew and imagined much, but had onaccount of my peculiar temperament been kept from all personal contact with churchyards andcemeteries. The strange stone house on the woodland slope was to me only a source of interestand speculation; and its cold, damp interior, into which I vainly peered through the apertureso tantalisingly left, contained for me no hint of death or decay. But in that instant of curiositywas born the madly unreasoning desire which has brought me to this hell of confinement. Spurredon by a voice which must have come from the hideous soul of the forest, I resolved to enterthe beckoning gloom in spite of the ponderous chains which barred my passage. In the waninglight of day I alternately rattled the rusty impediments with a view to throwing wide the stonedoor, and essayed to squeeze my slight form through the space already provided; but neitherplan met with success. At first curious, I was now frantic; and when in the thickening twilightI returned to my home, I had sworn to the hundred gods of the grove that at any costI would some day force an entrance to the black, chilly depths that seemed calling out to me.The physician with the iron-grey beard who comes each day to my room once told a visitor thatthis decision marked the beginning of a pitiful monomania; but I will leave final judgment tomy readers when they shall have learnt all.
The months following my discovery were spent in futile attempts to force thecomplicated padlock of the slightly open vault, and in carefully guarded inquiries regardingthe nature and history of the structure. With the traditionally receptive ears of the smallboy, I learned much; though an habitual secretiveness caused me to tell no one of my informationor my resolve. It is perhaps worth mentioning that I was not at all surprised or terrified onlearning of the nature of the vault. My rather original ideas regarding life and death had causedme to associate the cold clay with the breathing body in a vague fashion; and I felt that thegreat and sinister family of the burned-down mansion was in some way represented within thestone space I sought to explore. Mumbled tales of the weird rites and godless revels of bygoneyears in the ancient hall gave to me a new and potent interest in the tomb, before whose doorI would sit for hours at a time each day. Once I thrust a candle within the nearly closed entrance,but could see nothing save a flight of damp stone steps leading downward. The odour of the placerepelled yet bewitched me. I felt I had known it before, in a past remote beyond all recollection;beyond even my tenancy of the body I now possess.
The year after I first beheld the tomb, I stumbled upon a worm-eaten translationof Plutarch’s Lives in the book-filled attic of my home. Reading the life of Theseus,I was much impressed by that passage telling of the great stone beneath which the boyish herowas to find his tokens of destiny whenever he should become old enough to lift its enormousweight. This legend had the effect of dispelling my keenest impatience to enter the vault, forit made me feel that the time was not yet ripe. Later, I told myself, I should grow to a strengthand ingenuity which might enable me to unfasten the heavily chained door with ease; but untilthen I would do better by conforming to what seemed the will of Fate.
Accordingly my watches by the dank portal became less persistent, and muchof my time was spent in other though equally strange pursuits. I would sometimes rise very quietlyin the night, stealing out to walk in those churchyards and places of burial from which I hadbeen kept by my parents. What I did there I may not say, for I am not now sure of the realityof certain things; but I know that on the day after such a nocturnal ramble I would often astonishthose about me with my knowledge of topics almost forgotten for many generations. It was aftera night like this that I shocked the community with a queer conceit about the burial of therich and celebrated Squire Brewster, a maker of local history who was interred in 1711, andwhose slate headstone, bearing a graven skull and crossbones, was slowly crumbling to powder.In a moment of childish imagination I vowed not only that the undertaker, Goodman Simpson, hadstolen the silver-buckled shoes, silken hose, and satin small-clothes of the deceased beforeburial; but that the Squire himself, not fully inanimate, had turned twice in his mound-coveredcoffin on the day after interment.
But the idea of entering the tomb never left my thoughts; being indeed stimulatedby the unexpected genealogical discovery that my own maternal ancestry possessed at least aslight link with the supposedly extinct family of the Hydes. Last of my paternal race, I waslikewise the last of this older and more mysterious line. I began to feel that the tomb wasmine, and to look forward with hot eagerness to the time when I might pass within thatstone door and down those slimy stone steps in the dark. I now formed the habit of listeningvery intently at the slightly open portal, choosing my favourite hours of midnight stillnessfor the odd vigil. By the time I came of age, I had made a small clearing in the thicket beforethe mould-stained facade of the hillside, allowing the surrounding vegetation to encircle andoverhang the space like the walls and roof of a sylvan bower. This bower was my temple, thefastened door my shrine, and here I would lie outstretched on the mossy ground, thinking strangethoughts and dreaming strange dreams.
The night of the first revelation was a sultry one. I must have fallen asleepfrom fatigue, for it was with a distinct sense of awakening that I heard the voices.Of those tones and accents I hesitate to speak; of their quality I will not speak; butI may say that they presented certain uncanny differences in vocabulary, pronunciation, andmode of utterance. Every shade of New England dialect, from the uncouth syllables of the Puritancolonists to the precise rhetoric of fifty years ago, seemed represented in that shadowy colloquy,though it was only later that I noticed the fact. At the time, indeed, my attention was distractedfrom this matter by another phenomenon; a phenomenon so fleeting that I could not take oathupon its reality. I barely fancied that as I awoke, a light had been hurriedly extinguishedwithin the sunken sepulchre. I do not think I was either astounded or panic-stricken, but Iknow that I was greatly and permanently changed that night. Upon returning home I wentwith much directness to a rotting chest in the attic, wherein I found the key which next dayunlocked with ease the barrier I had so long stormed in vain.
It was in the soft glow of late afternoon that I first entered the vault onthe abandoned slope. A spell was upon me, and my heart leaped with an exultation I can but illdescribe. As I closed the door behind me and descended the dripping steps by the light of mylone candle, I seemed to know the way; and though the candle sputtered with the stifling reekof the place, I felt singularly at home in the musty, charnel-house air. Looking about me, Ibeheld many marble slabs bearing coffins, or the remains of coffins. Some of these were sealedand intact, but others had nearly vanished, leaving the silver handles and plates isolated amidstcertain curious heaps of whitish dust. Upon one plate I read the name of Sir Geoffrey Hyde,who had come from Sussex in 1640 and died here a few years later. In a conspicuous alcove wasone fairly well-preserved and untenanted casket, adorned with a single name which brought tome both a smile and a shudder. An odd impulse caused me to climb upon the broad slab, extinguishmy candle, and lie down within the vacant box.
In the grey light of dawn I staggered from the vault and locked the chain ofthe door behind me. I was no longer a young man, though but twenty-one winters had chilled mybodily frame. Early-rising villagers who observed my homeward progress looked at me strangely,and marvelled at the signs of ribald revelry which they saw in one whose life was known to besober and solitary. I did not appear before my parents till after a long and refreshing sleep.
Henceforward I haunted the tomb each night; seeing, hearing, and doing thingsI must never reveal. My speech, always susceptible to environmental influences, was the firstthing to succumb to the change; and my suddenly acquired archaism of diction was soon remarkedupon. Later a queer boldness and recklessness came into my demeanour, till I unconsciously grewto possess the bearing of a man of the world despite my lifelong seclusion. My formerly silenttongue waxed voluble with the easy grace of a Chesterfield or the godless cynicism of a Rochester.I displayed a peculiar erudition utterly unlike the fantastic, monkish lore over which I hadpored in youth; and covered the flyleaves of my books with facile impromptu epigrams which broughtup suggestions of Gay, Prior, and the sprightliest of the Augustan wits and rimesters. One morningat breakfast I came close to disaster by declaiming in palpably liquorish accents an effusionof eighteenth-century Bacchanalian mirth; a bit of Georgian playfulness never recorded in abook, which ran something like this:

Come hither, my lads, with your tankards of ale,
And drink to the present before it shall fail;
Pile each on your platter a mountain of beef,
For ’tis eating and drinking that bring us relief:
So fill up your glass,
For life will soon pass;
When you’re dead ye’ll ne’er drink to your king or your lass!
Anacreon had a red nose, so they say;
But what’s a red nose if ye’re happy and gay?
Gad split me! I’d rather be red whilst I’m here,
Than white as a lily—and dead half a year!
So Betty, my miss,
Come give me a kiss;
In hell there’s no innkeeper’s daughter like this!
Young Harry, propp’d up just as straight as he’s able,
Will soon lose his wig and slip under the table;
But fill up your goblets and pass ’em around—
Better under the table than under the ground!
So revel and chaff
As ye thirstily quaff:
Under six feet of dirt ’tis less easy to laugh!
The fiend strike me blue! I’m scarce able to walk,
And damn me if I can stand upright or talk!
Here, landlord, bid Betty to summon a chair;
I’ll try home for a while, for my wife is not there!
So lend me a hand;
I’m not able to stand,
But I’m gay whilst I linger on top of the land!

About this time I conceived my present fear of fire and thunderstorms. Previouslyindifferent to such things, I had now an unspeakable horror of them; and would retire to theinnermost recesses of the house whenever the heavens threatened an electrical display. A favouritehaunt of mine during the day was the ruined cellar of the mansion that had burned down, andin fancy I would picture the structure as it had been in its prime. On one occasion I startleda villager by leading him confidently to a shallow sub-cellar, of whose existence I seemed toknow in spite of the fact that it had been unseen and forgotten for many generations.
At last came that which I had long feared. My parents, alarmed at the alteredmanner and appearance of their only son, commenced to exert over my movements a kindly espionagewhich threatened to result in disaster. I had told no one of my visits to the tomb, having guardedmy secret purpose with religious zeal since childhood; but now I was forced to exercise carein threading the mazes of the wooded hollow, that I might throw off a possible pursuer. My keyto the vault I kept suspended from a cord about my neck, its presence known only to me. I nevercarried out of the sepulchre any of the things I came upon whilst within its walls.
One morning as I emerged from the damp tomb and fastened the chain of the portalwith none too steady hand, I beheld in an adjacent thicket the dreaded face of a watcher. Surelythe end was near; for my bower was discovered, and the objective of my nocturnal journeys revealed.The man did not accost me, so I hastened home in an effort to overhear what he might reportto my careworn father. Were my sojourns beyond the chained door about to be proclaimed to theworld? Imagine my delighted astonishment on hearing the spy inform my parent in a cautious whisperthat I had spent the night in the bower outside the tomb; my sleep-filmed eyes fixedupon the crevice where the padlocked portal stood ajar! By what miracle had the watcher beenthus deluded? I was now convinced that a supernatural agency protected me. Made bold by thisheaven-sent circumstance, I began to resume perfect openness in going to the vault; confidentthat no one could witness my entrance. For a week I tasted to the full the joys of that charnelconviviality which I must not describe, when the thing happened, and I was borne awayto this accursed abode of sorrow and monotony.
I should not have ventured out that night; for the taint of thunder was inthe clouds, and a hellish phosphorescence rose from the rank swamp at the bottom of the hollow.The call of the dead, too, was different. Instead of the hillside tomb, it was the charred cellaron the crest of the slope whose presiding daemon beckoned to me with unseen fingers. As I emergedfrom an intervening grove upon the plain before the ruin, I beheld in the misty moonlight athing I had always vaguely expected. The mansion, gone for a century, once more reared its statelyheight to the raptured vision; every window ablaze with the splendour of many candles. Up thelong drive rolled the coaches of the Boston gentry, whilst on foot came a numerous assemblageof powdered exquisites from the neighbouring mansions. With this throng I mingled, though Iknew I belonged with the hosts rather than with the guests. Inside the hall were music, laughter,and wine on every hand. Several faces I recognised; though I should have known them better hadthey been shrivelled or eaten away by death and decomposition. Amidst a wild and reckless throngI was the wildest and most abandoned. Gay blasphemy poured in torrents from my lips, and inmy shocking sallies I heeded no law of God, Man, or Nature. Suddenly a peal of thunder, resonanteven above the din of the swinish revelry, clave the very roof and laid a hush of fear uponthe boisterous company. Red tongues of flame and searing gusts of heat engulfed the house; andthe roysterers, struck with terror at the descent of a calamity which seemed to transcend thebounds of unguided Nature, fled shrieking into the night. I alone remained, riveted to my seatby a grovelling fear which I had never felt before. And then a second horror took possessionof my soul. Burnt alive to ashes, my body dispersed by the four winds, I might never liein the tomb of the Hydes! Was not my coffin prepared for me? Had I not a right to rest tilleternity amongst the descendants of Sir Geoffrey Hyde? Aye! I would claim my heritage of death,even though my soul go seeking through the ages for another corporeal tenement to representit on that vacant slab in the alcove of the vault. Jervas Hyde should never share thesad fate of Palinurus!
As the phantom of the burning house faded, I found myself screaming and strugglingmadly in the arms of two men, one of whom was the spy who had followed me to the tomb. Rainwas pouring down in torrents, and upon the southern horizon were flashes of the lightning thathad so lately passed over our heads. My father, his face lined with sorrow, stood by as I shoutedmy demands to be laid within the tomb; frequently admonishing my captors to treat me as gentlyas they could. A blackened circle on the floor of the ruined cellar told of a violent strokefrom the heavens; and from this spot a group of curious villagers with lanterns were pryinga small box of antique workmanship which the thunderbolt had brought to light. Ceasing my futileand now objectless writhing, I watched the spectators as they viewed the treasure-trove, andwas permitted to share in their discoveries. The box, whose fastenings were broken by the strokewhich had unearthed it, contained many papers and objects of value; but I had eyes for one thingalone. It was the porcelain miniature of a young man in a smartly curled bag-wig, and bore theinitials “J. H.” The face was such that as I gazed, I might well have been studyingmy mirror.
On the following day I was brought to this room with the barred windows, butI have been kept informed of certain things through an aged and simple-minded servitor, forwhom I bore a fondness in infancy, and who like me loves the churchyard. What I have dared relateof my experiences within the vault has brought me only pitying smiles. My father, who visitsme frequently, declares that at no time did I pass the chained portal, and swears that the rustedpadlock had not been touched for fifty years when he examined it. He even says that all thevillage knew of my journeys to the tomb, and that I was often watched as I slept in the boweroutside the grim facade, my half-open eyes fixed on the crevice that leads to the interior.Against these assertions I have no tangible proof to offer, since my key to the padlock waslost in the struggle on that night of horrors. The strange things of the past which I learntduring those nocturnal meetings with the dead he dismisses as the fruits of my lifelong andomnivorous browsing amongst the ancient volumes of the family library. Had it not been for myold servant Hiram, I should have by this time become quite convinced of my madness.
But Hiram, loyal to the last, has held faith in me, and has done that whichimpels me to make public at least a part of my story. A week ago he burst open the lock whichchains the door of the tomb perpetually ajar, and descended with a lantern into the murky depths.On a slab in an alcove he found an old but empty coffin whose tarnished plate bears the singleword “Jervas”. In that coffin and in that vault they have promised me I shallbe buried.
