I awoke abruptly from a horrible dream and stared wildly about. Then, seeing the high, archedceiling and the narrow stained windows of my friend’s room, a flood of uneasy revelationcoursed over me; and I knew that all of Andrew’s hopes had been realized. I lay supinein a large bed, the posts of which reared upward in dizzy perspective; while on vast shelvesabout the chamber were the familiar books and antiques I was accustomed to seeing in that secludedcorner of the crumbling and ancient mansion which had formed our joint home for many years.On a table by the wall stood a huge candelabrum of early workmanship and design, and the usuallight window-curtains had been replaced by hangings of somber black, which took on a faint,ghostly luster in the dying light.
I recalled forcibly the events preceding my confinement and seclusion in thisveritable medieval fortress. They were not pleasant, and I shuddered anew when I rememberedthe couch that had held me before my tenancy of the present one—the couch that everyonesupposed would be my last. Memory burned afresh regarding those hideous circumstances whichhad compelled me to choose between a true death and a hypothetical one—with a later re-animationby therapeutic methods known only to my comrade, Marshall Andrews. The whole thing had begunwhen I returned from the Orient a year before and discovered, to my utter horror, that I hadcontracted leprosy while abroad. I had known that I was taking grave chances in caring for mystricken brother in the Philippines, but no hint of my own affliction appeared until I returnedto my native land. Andrews himself had made the discovery, and kept it from me as long as possible;but our close acquaintance soon disclosed the awful truth.
At once I was quartered in our ancient abode atop the crags overlooking crumblingHampden, from whose musty halls and quaint, arched doorways I was never permitted to go forth.It was a terrible existence, with the yellow shadow hanging constantly over me; yet my friendnever faltered in his faith, taking care not to contract the dread scourge, but meanwhile makinglife as pleasant and comfortable as possible. His widespread though somewhat sinister fame asa surgeon prevented any authority from discovering my plight and shipping me away.
It was after nearly a year of this seclusion—late in August—thatAndrews decided on a trip to the West Indies—to study “native” medical methods,he said. I was left in care of venerable Simes, the household factotum. So far no outward signsof the disease had developed, and I enjoyed a tolerable though almost completely private existenceduring my colleague’s absence. It was during this time that I read many of the tomes Andrewshad acquired in the course of his twenty years as a surgeon, and learned why his reputation,though locally of the highest, was just a bit shady. For the volumes included any number offanciful subjects hardly related to modern medical knowledge: treatises and unauthoritativearticles on monstrous experiments in surgery; accounts of the bizarre effects of glandular transplantationand rejuvenation in animals and men alike; brochures on attempted brain transference, and ahost of other fanatical speculations not countenanced by orthodox physicians. It appeared, too,that Andrews was an authority on obscure medicaments; some of the few books I waded throughrevealing that he had spent much time in chemistry and in the search for new drugs which mightbe used as aids in surgery. Looking back at those studies now, I find them hellishly suggestivewhen associated with his later experiments.
Andrews was gone longer than I expected, returning early in November, almostfour months later; and when he did arrive, I was quite anxious to see him, since my conditionwas at last on the brink of becoming noticeable. I had reached a point where I must seek absoluteprivacy to keep from being discovered. But my anxiety was slight as compared with his exuberanceover a certain new plan he had hatched while in the Indies—a plan to be carried out withthe aid of a curious drug he had learned of from a native “doctor” in Haiti. Whenhe explained that his idea concerned me, I became somewhat alarmed; though in my position therecould be little to make my plight worse. I had, indeed, considered more than once the oblivionthat would come with a revolver or a plunge from the roof to the jagged rocks below.
On the day after his arrival, in the seclusion of the dimly lit study, he outlinedthe whole grisly scheme. He had found in Haiti a drug, the formula for which he would developlater, which induced a state of profound sleep in anyone taking it; a trance so deep that deathwas closely counterfeited—with all muscular reflexes, even the respiration and heart-beat,completely stilled for the time being. Andrews had, he said, seen it demonstrated on nativesmany times. Some of them remained somnolent for days at a time, wholly immobile and as muchlike death as death itself. This suspended animation, he explained further, would even passthe closest examination of any medical man. He himself, according to all known laws, would haveto report as dead a man under the influence of such a drug. He stated, too, that the subject’sbody assumed the precise appearance of a corpse—even a slight rigor mortis developingin prolonged cases.
For some time his purpose did not seem wholly clear, but when the full importof his words became apparent I felt weak and nauseated. Yet in another way I was relieved; forthe thing meant at least a partial escape from my curse, an escape from the banishment and shameof an ordinary death of the dread leprosy. Briefly, his plan was to administer a strong doseof the drug to me and call the local authorities, who would immediately pronounce me dead, andsee that I was buried within a very short while. He felt assured that with their careless examinationthey would fail to notice my leprosy symptoms, which in truth had hardly appeared. Only a trifleover fifteen months had passed since I had caught the disease, whereas the corruption takesseven years to run its entire course.
Later, he said, would come resurrection. After my interment in the family graveyard—besidemy centuried dwelling and barely a quarter-mile from his own ancient pile—the appropriatesteps would be taken. Finally, when my estate was settled and my decease widely known, he wouldsecretly open the tomb and bring me to his own abode again, still alive and none the worse formy adventure. It seemed a ghastly and daring plan, but to me it offered the only hope for evena partial freedom; so I accepted his proposition, but not without a myriad of misgivings. Whatif the effect of the drug should wear off while I was in my tomb? What if the coroner shoulddiscover the awful ruse, and fail to inter me? These were some of the hideous doubts which assailedme before the experiment. Though death would have been a release from my curse, I feared iteven worse than the yellow scourge; feared it even when I could see its black wings constantlyhovering over me.
Fortunately I was spared the horror of viewing my own funeral and burial rites.They must, however, have gone just as Andrews had planned, even to the subsequent disinterment;for after the initial dose of the poison from Haiti I lapsed into a semi-paralytic state andfrom that to a profound, night-black sleep. The drug had been administered in my room, and Andrewshad told me before giving it that he would recommend to the coroner a verdict of heart failuredue to nerve strain. Of course, there was no embalming—Andrews saw to that—and thewhole procedure, leading up to my secret transportation from the graveyard to his crumblingmanor, covered a period of three days. Having been buried late in the afternoon of the thirdday, my body was secured by Andrews that very night. He had replaced the fresh sod just as ithad been when the workmen left. Old Simes, sworn to secrecy, had helped Andrews in his ghoulishtask.
Later I had lain for over a week in my old familiar bed. Owing to some unexpectedeffect of the drug, my whole body was completely paralyzed, so that I could move my head onlyslightly. All my senses, however, were fully alert, and by another week’s time I was ableto take nourishment in good quantities. Andrews explained that my body would gradually regainits former sensibilities; though owing to the presence of the leprosy it might take considerabletime. He seemed greatly interested in analyzing my daily symptoms, and always asked if therewas any feeling present in my body.
Many days passed before I was able to control any part of my anatomy, and muchlonger before the paralysis crept from my enfeebled limbs so that I could feel the ordinarybodily reactions. Lying and staring at my numb hulk was like having it injected with a perpetualanesthetic. There was a total alienation I could not understand, considering that my head andneck were quite alive and in good health.
Andrews explained that he had revived my upper half first and could not accountfor the complete bodily paralysis; though my condition seemed to trouble him little consideringthe damnably intent interest he centered upon my reactions and stimuli from the very beginning.Many times during lulls in our conversation I would catch a strange gleam in his eyes as heviewed me on the couch—a glint of victorious exultation which, queerly enough, he nevervoiced aloud; though he seemed to be quite glad that I had run the gauntlet of death and hadcome through alive. Still, there was that horror I was to meet in less than six years, whichadded to my desolation and melancholy during the tedious days in which I awaited the returnof normal bodily functions. But I would be up and about, he assured me, before very long, enjoyingan existence few men had ever experienced. The words did not, however, impress me with theirtrue and ghastly meaning until many days later.
During that awful siege in bed Andrews and I became somewhat estranged. Heno longer treated me so much like a friend as like an implement in his skilled and greedy fingers.I found him possessed of unexpected traits—little examples of baseness and cruelty, apparenteven to the hardened Simes, which disturbed me in a most unusual manner. Often he would displayextraordinary cruelty to live specimens in his laboratory, for he was constantly carrying onvarious hidden projects in glandular and muscular transplantation on guinea-pigs and rabbits.He had also been employing his newly discovered sleeping-potion in curious experiments withsuspended animation. But of these things he told me very little; though old Simes often letslip chance comments which shed some light on the proceedings. I was not certain how much theold servant knew, but he had surely learned considerable, being a constant companion to bothAndrews and myself.
With the passage of time, a slow but consistent feeling began creeping intomy disabled body; and at the reviving symptoms Andrews took a fanatical interest in my case.He still seemed more coldly analytical than sympathetic toward me, taking my pulse and heart-beatwith more than usual zeal. Occasionally, in his fevered examinations, I saw his hands trembleslightly—an uncommon sight with so skilled a surgeon—but he seemed oblivious of myscrutiny. I was never allowed even a momentary glimpse of my full body, but with the feeblereturn of the sense of touch, I was aware of a bulk and heaviness which at first seemed awkwardand unfamiliar.
Gradually I regained the use of my hands and arms; and with the passing ofthe paralysis came a new and terrible sensation of physical estrangement. My limbs had difficultyin following the commands of my mind, and every movement was jerky and uncertain. So clumsywere my hands, that I had to become accustomed to them all over again. This must, I thought,be due to my disease and the advance of the contagion in my system. Being unaware of how theearly symptoms affected the victim (my brother’s being a more advanced case), I had nomeans of judging; and since Andrews shunned the subject, I deemed it better to remain silent.
One day I asked Andrews—I no longer considered him a friend—if Imight try rising and sitting up in bed. At first he objected strenuously, but later, after cautioningme to keep the blankets well up around my chin so that I would not be chilled, he permittedit. This seemed strange, in view of the comfortable temperature. Now that late autumn was slowlyturning into winter, the room was always well heated. A growing chilliness at night, and occasionalglimpses of a leaden sky through the window, had told me of the changing season; for no calendarwas ever in sight upon the dingy walls. With the gentle help of Simes I was eased to a sittingposition, Andrews coldly watching from the door to the laboratory. At my success a slow smilespread across his leering features, and he turned to disappear from the darkened doorway. Hismood did nothing to improve my condition. Old Simes, usually so regular and consistent, wasnow often late in his duties, sometimes leaving me alone for hours at a time.
The terrible sense of alienation was heightened by my new position. It seemedthat the legs and arms inside my gown were hardly able to follow the summoning of my mind, andit became mentally exhausting to continue movement for any length of time. My fingers, woefullyclumsy, were wholly unfamiliar to my inner sense of touch, and I wondered vaguely if I wereto be accursed the rest of my days with an awkwardness induced by my dread malady.
It was on the evening following my half-recovery that the dreams began. I wastormented not only at night but during the day as well. I would awaken, screaming horribly,from some frightful nightmare I dared not think about outside the realm of sleep. These dreamsconsisted mainly of ghoulish things; graveyards at night, stalking corpses, and lost souls amida chaos of blinding light and shadow. The terrible reality of the visions disturbed memost of all: it seemed that some inside influence was inducing the grisly vistas of moonlittombstones and endless catacombs of the restless dead. I could not place their source; and atthe end of a week I was quite frantic with abominable thoughts which seemed to obtrude themselvesupon my unwelcome consciousness.
By that time a slow plan was forming whereby I might escape the living hellinto which I had been propelled. Andrews cared less and less about me, seeming intent only onmy progress and growth and recovery of normal muscular reactions. I was becoming every day moreconvinced of the nefarious doings going on in that laboratory across the threshold—theanimal cries were shocking, and rasped hideously on my overwrought nerves. And I was graduallybeginning to think that Andrews had not saved me from deportation solely for my own benefit,but for some accursed reason of his own. Simes’s attention was slowly becoming slighterand slighter, and I was convinced that the aged servitor had a hand in the deviltry somewhere.Andrews no longer eyed me as a friend, but as an object of experimentation; nor did I like theway he fingered his scalpel when he stood in the narrow doorway and stared at me with craftyalertness. I had never before seen such a transformation come over any man. His ordinarily handsomefeatures were now lined and whisker-grown, and his eyes gleamed as if some imp of Satan werestaring from them. His cold, calculating gaze made me shudder horribly, and gave me a freshdetermination to free myself from his bondage as soon as possible.
I had lost track of time during my dream-orgy, and had no way of knowing howfast the days were passing. The curtains were often drawn in the daytime, the room being litby waxen cylinders in the large candelabrum. It was a nightmare of living horror and unreality;though through it all I was gradually becoming stronger. I always gave careful responses toAndrews’ inquiries concerning my returning physical control, concealing the fact that anew life was vibrating through me with every passing day—an altogether strange sort ofstrength, but one which I was counting on to serve me in the coming crisis.
Finally, one chilly evening when the candles had been extinguished, and a paleshaft of moonlight fell through the dark curtains upon my bed, I determined to rise and carryout my plan of action. There had been no movement from either of my captors for several hours,and I was confident that both were asleep in adjoining bedchambers. Shifting my cumbersome weightcarefully, I rose to a sitting position and crawled cautiously out of bed, down upon the floor.A vertigo gripped me momentarily, and a wave of weakness flooded my entire being. But finallystrength returned, and by clutching at a bed-post I was able to stand upon my feet for the firsttime in many months. Gradually a new strength coursed through me, and I donned the dark robewhich I had seen hanging on a nearby chair. It was quite long, but served as a cloak over mynightdress. Again came that feeling of awful unfamiliarity which I had experienced in bed; thatsense of alienation, and of difficulty in making my limbs perform as they should. But therewas need for haste before my feeble strength might give out. As a last precaution in dressing,I slipped some old shoes over my feet; but though I could have sworn they were my own, theyseemed abnormally loose, so that I decided they must belong to the aged Simes.
Seeing no other heavy objects in the room, I seized from the table the hugecandelabrum, upon which the moon shone with a pallid glow, and proceeded very quietly towardthe laboratory door.
My first steps came jerkily and with much difficulty, and in the semi-darknessI was unable to make my way very rapidly. When I reached the threshold, a glance within revealedmy former friend seated in a large overstuffed chair; while beside him was a smoking-stand uponwhich were assorted bottles and a glass. He reclined half-way in the moonlight through the largewindow, and his greasy features were creased in a drunken smirk. An opened book lay in his lap—oneof the hideous tomes from his private library.
For a long moment I gloated over the prospect before me, and then, steppingforward suddenly, I brought the heavy weapon down upon his unprotected head. The dull crunchwas followed by a spurt of blood, and the fiend crumpled to the floor, his head laid half open.I felt no contrition at taking the man’s life in such a manner. In the hideous, half-visiblespecimens of his surgical wizardry scattered about the room in various stages of completionand preservation, I felt there was enough evidence to blast his soul without my aid. Andrewshad gone too far in his practices to continue living, and as one of his monstrous specimens—ofthat I was now hideously certain—it was my duty to exterminate him.
Simes, I realized, would be no such easy matter; indeed, only unusual goodfortune had caused me to find Andrews unconscious. When I finally reeled up to the servant’sbedchamber door, faint from exhaustion, I knew it would take all my remaining strength to completethe ordeal.
The old man’s room was in utmost darkness, being on the north side ofthe structure, but he must have seen me silhouetted in the doorway as I came in. He screamedhoarsely, and I aimed the candelabrum at him from the threshold. It struck something soft, makinga sloughing sound in the darkness; but the screaming continued. From that time on events becamehazy and jumbled together, but I remember grappling with the man and choking the life from himlittle by little. He gibbered a host of awful things before I could lay hands on him—criedand begged for mercy from my clutching fingers. I hardly realized my own strength in that madmoment which left Andrews’ associate in a condition like his own.
Retreating from the darkened chamber, I stumbled for the stairway door, saggedthrough it, and somehow reached the landing below. No lamps were burning, and my only lightwas a filtering of moonbeams coming from the narrow windows in the hall. But I made my jerkyway over the cold, damp slabs of stone, reeling from the terrible weakness of my exertion, andreached the front door after ages of fumbling and crawling about in the darkness.
Vague memories and haunting shadows came to taunt me in that ancient hallway;shadows once friendly and understandable, but now grown alien and unrecognizable, so that Istumbled down the worn steps in a frenzy of something more than fear. For a moment I stood inthe shadow of the giant stone manor, viewing the moonlit trail down which I must go to reachthe home of my forefathers, only a quarter of a mile distant. But the way seemed long, and fora while I despaired of ever traversing the whole of it.
At last I grasped a piece of dead wood as a cane and set out down the windingroad. Ahead, seemingly only a few rods away in the moonlight, stood the venerable mansion wheremy ancestors had lived and died. Its turrets rose spectrally in the shimmering radiance, andthe black shadow cast on the beetling hillside appeared to shift and waver, as if belongingto a castle of unreal substance. There stood the monument of half a century; a haven for allmy family old and young, which I had deserted many years ago to live with the fanatical Andrews.It stood empty on that fateful night, and I hope that it may always remain so.
In some manner I reached the aged place; though I do not remember the lasthalf of the journey at all. It was enough to be near the family cemetery, among whose moss-coveredand crumbling stones I would seek the oblivion I had desired. As I approached the moonlit spotthe old familiarity—so absent during my abnormal existence—returned to plague me ina wholly unexpected way. I drew close to my own tombstone, and the feeling of homecoming grewstronger; with it came a fresh flood of that awful sense of alienation and disembodiment whichI knew so well. I was satisfied that the end was drawing near; nor did I stop to analyze emotionstill a little later, when the full horror of my position burst upon me.
Intuitively I knew my own tombstone; for the grass had scarcely begun to growbetween the pieces of sod. With feverish haste I began clawing at the mound, and scraping thewet earth from the hole left by the removal of the grass and roots. How long I worked in thenitrous soil before my fingers struck the coffin-lid, I can never say; but sweat was pouringfrom me and my nails were but useless, bleeding hooks.
At last I threw out the last bit of loose earth, and with trembling fingerstugged on the heavy lid. It gave a trifle; and I was prepared to lift it completely open whena fetid and nauseous odor assailed my nostrils. I started erect, horrified. Had some idiot placedmy tombstone on the wrong grave, causing me to unearth another body? For surely there couldbe no mistaking that awful stench. Gradually a hideous uncertainty came over me and I scrambledfrom the hole. One look at the newly made headpiece was enough. This was indeed my own grave&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.but what fool had buried within it another corpse?
All at once a bit of the unspeakable truth propelled itself upon my brain.The odor, in spite of its putrescence, seemed somehow familiar—horribly familiar.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Yet I could not credit my senses with such an idea. Reeling and cursing, I fell into the blackcavity once more, and by the aid of a hastily lit match, lifted the long lid completely open.Then the light went out, as if extinguished by a malignant hand, and I clawed my way out ofthat accursed pit, screaming in a frenzy of fear and loathing.
When I regained consciousness I was lying before the door of my own ancientmanor, where I must have crawled after that hideous rendezvous in the family cemetery. I realizedthat dawn was close at hand, and rose feebly, opening the aged portal before me and enteringthe place which had known no footsteps for over a decade. A fever was ravaging my weakened body,so that I was hardly able to stand, but I made my way slowly through the musty, dimly lit chambersand staggered into my own study—the study I had deserted so many years before.
When the sun has risen, I shall go to the ancient well beneath the old willowtree by the cemetery and cast my deformed self into it. No other man shall ever viewthis blasphemy which has survived life longer than it should have. I do not know what peoplewill say when they see my disordered grave, but this will not trouble me if I can find oblivionfrom that which I beheld amidst the crumbling, moss-crusted stones of the hideous place.
I know now why Andrews was so secretive in his actions; so damnably gloatingin his attitude toward me after my artificial death. He had meant me for a specimen all thetime—a specimen of his greatest feat of surgery, his masterpiece of unclean witchery&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.an example of perverted artistry for him alone to see. Where Andrews obtained that otherwith which I lay accursed in his moldering mansion I shall probably never know; but I am afraidthat it was brought from Haiti along with his fiendish medicine. At least these long hairy armsand horrible short legs are alien to me&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. alien to all natural and sane lawsof mankind. The thought that I shall be tortured with that other during the rest of mybrief existence is another hell.
Now I can but wish for that which once was mine; that which every man blessedof God ought to have at death; that which I saw in that awful moment in the ancient burial groundwhen I raised the lid on the coffin—my own shrunken, decayed, and headless body.
