For one who has never faced the danger of legal execution, I have a rather queer horror of theelectric chair as a subject. Indeed, I think the topic gives me more of a shudder than it givesmany a man who has been on trial for his life. The reason is that I associate the thing withan incident of forty years ago—a very strange incident which brought me close to the edgeof the unknown’s black abyss.
In 1889 I was an auditor and investigator connected with the Tlaxcala MiningCompany of San Francisco, which operated several small silver and copper properties in the SanMateo Mountains in Mexico. There had been some trouble at Mine No. 3, which had a surly, furtiveassistant superintendent named Arthur Feldon; and on August 6th the firm received a telegramsaying that Feldon had decamped, taking with him all the stock records, securities, and privatepapers, and leaving the whole clerical and financial situation in dire confusion.
This development was a severe blow to the company, and late in the afternoonPresident McComb called me into his office to give orders for the recovery of the papers atany cost. There were, he knew, grave drawbacks. I had never seen Feldon, and there were onlyvery indifferent photographs to go by. Moreover, my own wedding was set for Thursday of thefollowing week—only nine days ahead—so that I was naturally not eager to be hurriedoff to Mexico on a man-hunt of indefinite length. The need, however, was so great that McCombfelt justified in asking me to go at once; and I for my part decided that the effect on my statuswith the company would make ready acquiescence eminently worth while.
I was to start that night, using the president’s private car as far asMexico City, after which I would have to take a narrow-gauge railway to the mines. Jackson,the superintendent of No. 3, would give me all details and any possible clues upon my arrival;and then the search would begin in earnest—through the mountains, down to the coast, oramong the byways of Mexico City, as the case might be. I set out with a grim determination toget the matter done—and successfully done—as swiftly as possible; and tempered mydiscontent with pictures of an early return with papers and culprit, and of a wedding whichwould be almost a triumphal ceremony.
Having notified my family, fiancée, and principal friends, and madehasty preparations for the trip, I met President McComb at eight p.m. at the Southern Pacificdepot, received from him some written instructions and a check-book, and left in his car attachedto the 8:15 eastbound transcontinental train. The journey that followed seemed destined foruneventfulness, and after a good night’s sleep I revelled in the ease of the private carso thoughtfully assigned me; reading my instructions with care, and formulating plans for thecapture of Feldon and the recovery of the documents. I knew the Tlaxcala country quite well—probablymuch better than the missing man—hence had a certain amount of advantage in my search unlesshe had already used the railway.
According to the instructions, Feldon had been a subject of worry to SuperintendentJackson for some time; acting secretively, and working unaccountably in the company’s laboratoryat odd hours. That he was implicated with a Mexican boss and several peons in some thefts ofore was strongly suspected; but though the natives had been discharged, there was not enoughevidence to warrant any positive step regarding the subtle official. Indeed, despite his furtiveness,there seemed to be more of defiance than of guilt in the man’s bearing. He wore a chipon his shoulder, and talked as if the company were cheating him instead of his cheating thecompany. The obvious surveillance of his colleagues, Jackson wrote, appeared to irritate himincreasingly; and now he had gone with everything of importance in the office. Of his possiblewhereabouts no guess could be made; though Jackson’s final telegram suggested the wildslopes of the Sierra de Malinche, that tall, myth-surrounded peak with the corpse-shaped silhouette,from whose neighbourhood the thieving natives were said to have come.
At El Paso, which we reached at two a.m. of the night following our start,my private car was detached from the transcontinental train and joined to an engine speciallyordered by telegraph to take it southward to Mexico City. I continued to drowse till dawn, andall the next day grew bored on the flat, desert Chihuahua landscape. The crew had told me wewere due in Mexico City at noon Friday, but I soon saw that countless delays were wasting precioushours. There were waits on sidings all along the single-tracked route, and now and then a hot-boxor other difficulty would further complicate the schedule.
At Torreón we were six hours late, and it was almost eight o’clockon Friday evening—fully twelve hours behind schedule—when the conductor consentedto do some speeding in an effort to make up time. My nerves were on edge, and I could do nothingbut pace the car in desperation. In the end I found that the speeding had been purchased ata high cost indeed, for within a half-hour the symptoms of a hot-box had developed in my caritself; so that after a maddening wait the crew decided that all the bearings would have tobe overhauled after a quarter-speed limp ahead to the next station with shops—the factorytown of Querétaro. This was the last straw, and I almost stamped like a child. ActuallyI sometimes caught myself pushing at my chair-arm as if trying to urge the train forward ata less snail-like pace.
It was almost ten in the evening when we drew into Querétaro, and Ispent a fretful hour on the station platform while my car was sidetracked and tinkered at bya dozen native mechanics. At last they told me the job was too much for them, since the forwardtruck needed new parts which could not be obtained nearer than Mexico City. Everything indeedseemed against me, and I gritted my teeth when I thought of Feldon getting farther and fartheraway—perhaps to the easy cover of Vera Cruz with its shipping or Mexico City with its variedrail facilities—while fresh delays kept me tied and helpless. Of course Jackson had notifiedthe police in all the cities around, but I knew with sorrow what their efficiency amounted to.
The best I could do, I soon found out, was to take the regular night expressfor Mexico City, which ran from Aguas Calientes and made a five-minute stop at Querétaro.It would be along at one a.m. if on time, and was due in Mexico City at five o’clock Saturdaymorning. When I purchased my ticket I found that the train would be made up of European compartmentcarriages instead of long American cars with rows of two-seat chairs. These had been much usedin the early days of Mexican railroading, owing to the European construction interests backof the first lines; and in 1889 the Mexican Central was still running a fair number of themon its shorter trips. Ordinarily I prefer the American coaches, since I hate to have peoplefacing me; but for this once I was glad of the foreign carriage. At such a time of night I stooda good chance of having a whole compartment to myself, and in my tired, nervously hypersensitivestate I welcomed the solitude—as well as the comfortably upholstered seat with soft arm-restsand head-cushion, running the whole width of the vehicle. I bought a first-class ticket, obtainedmy valise from the sidetracked private car, telegraphed both President McComb and Jackson ofwhat had happened, and settled down in the station to wait for the night express as patientlyas my strained nerves would let me.
For a wonder, the train was only half an hour late; though even so, the solitarystation vigil had about finished my endurance. The conductor, shewing me into a compartment,told me he expected to make up the delay and reach the capital on time; and I stretched myselfcomfortably on the forward-facing seat in the expectation of a quiet three-and-a-half-hour run.The light from the overhead oil lamp was soothingly dim, and I wondered whether I could snatchsome much-needed sleep in spite of my anxiety and nerve-tension. It seemed, as the train joltedinto motion, that I was alone; and I was heartily glad of it. My thoughts leaped ahead to myquest, and I nodded with the accelerating rhythm of the speeding string of carriages.
Then suddenly I perceived that I was not alone after all. In the corner diagonallyopposite me, slumped down so that his face was invisible, sat a roughly clad man of unusualsize, whom the feeble light had failed to reveal before. Beside him on the seat was a huge valise,battered and bulging, and tightly gripped even in his sleep by one of his incongruously slenderhands. As the engine whistled sharply at some curve or crossing, the sleeper started nervouslyinto a kind of watchful half-awakening; raising his head and disclosing a handsome face, beardedand clearly Anglo-Saxon, with dark, lustrous eyes. At sight of me his wakefulness became complete,and I wondered at the rather hostile wildness of his glance. No doubt, I thought, he resentedmy presence when he had hoped to have the compartment alone all the way; just as I was myselfdisappointed to find strange company in the half-lighted carriage. The best we could do, however,was to accept the situation gracefully; so I began apologising to the man for my intrusion.He seemed to be a fellow-American, and we could both feel more at ease after a few civilities.Then we could leave each other in peace for the balance of the journey.
To my surprise, the stranger did not respond to my courtesies with so muchas a word. Instead, he kept staring at me fiercely and almost appraisingly, and brushed asidemy embarrassed proffer of a cigar with a nervous lateral movement of his disengaged hand. Hisother hand still tensely clutched the great, worn valise, and his whole person seemed to radiatesome obscure malignity. After a time he abruptly turned his face toward the window, though therewas nothing to see in the dense blackness outside. Oddly, he appeared to be looking at somethingas intently as if there really were something to look at. I decided to leave him to his owncurious devices and meditations without further annoyance; so settled back in my seat, drewthe brim of my soft hat over my face, and closed my eyes in an effort to snatch the sleep Ihad half counted on.
I could not have dozed very long or very fully when my eyes fell open as ifin response to some external force. Closing them again with some determination, I renewed myquest of a nap, yet wholly without avail. An intangible influence seemed bent on keeping meawake; so raising my head, I looked about the dimly lighted compartment to see if anything wereamiss. All appeared normal, but I noticed that the stranger in the opposite corner was lookingat me very intently—intently, though without any of the geniality or friendliness whichwould have implied a change from his former surly attitude. I did not attempt conversation thistime, but leaned back in my previous sleepy posture; half closing my eyes as if I had dozedoff once more, yet continuing to watch him curiously from beneath my down-turned hat brim.
As the train rattled onward through the night I saw a subtle and gradual metamorphosiscome over the expression of the staring man. Evidently satisfied that I was asleep, he allowedhis face to reflect a curious jumble of emotions, the nature of which seemed anything but reassuring.Hatred, fear, triumph, and fanaticism flickered compositely over the lines of his lips and theangles of his eyes, while his gaze became a glare of really alarming greed and ferocity. Suddenlyit dawned upon me that this man was mad, and dangerously so.
I will not pretend that I was anything but deeply and thoroughly frightenedwhen I saw how things stood. Perspiration started out all over me, and I had hard work to maintainmy attitude of relaxation and slumber. Life had many attractions for me just then, and the thoughtof dealing with a homicidal maniac—possibly armed and certainly powerful to a marvellousdegree—was a dismaying and terrifying one. My disadvantage in any sort of struggle wasenormous; for the man was a virtual giant, evidently in the best of athletic trim, while I havealways been rather frail, and was then almost worn out with anxiety, sleeplessness, and nervoustension. It was undeniably a bad moment for me, and I felt pretty close to a horrible deathas I recognised the fury of madness in the stranger’s eyes. Events from the past came upinto my consciousness as if for a farewell—just as a drowning man’s whole life issaid to resurrect itself before him at the last moment.
Of course I had my revolver in my coat pocket, but any motion of mine to reachand draw it would be instantly obvious. Moreover, if I did secure it, there was no telling whateffect it would have on the maniac. Even if I shot him once or twice he might have enough remainingstrength to get the gun from me and deal with me in his own way; or if he were armed himselfhe might shoot or stab without trying to disarm me. One can cow a sane man by covering him witha pistol, but an insane man’s complete indifference to consequences gives him a strengthand menace quite superhuman for the time being. Even in those pre-Freudian days I had a common-senserealisation of the dangerous power of a person without normal inhibitions. That the strangerin the corner was indeed about to start some murderous action, his burning eyes and twitchingfacial muscles did not permit me to doubt for a moment.
Suddenly I heard his breath begin to come in excited gasps, and saw his chestheaving with mounting excitement. The time for a showdown was close, and I tried desperatelyto think of the best thing to do. Without interrupting my pretence of sleep, I began to slidemy right hand gradually and inconspicuously toward the pocket containing my pistol; watchingthe madman closely as I did so, to see if he would detect any move. Unfortunately he did—almostbefore he had time to register the fact in his expression. With a bound so agile and abruptas to be almost incredible in a man of his size, he was upon me before I knew what had happened;looming up and swaying forward like a giant ogre of legend, and pinioning me with one powerfulhand while with the other he forestalled me in reaching the revolver. Taking it from my pocketand placing it in his own, he released me contemptuously, well knowing how fully his physiqueplaced me at his mercy. Then he stood up at his full height—his head almost touching theroof of the carriage—and stared down at me with eyes whose fury had quickly turned to alook of pitying scorn and ghoulish calculation.
I did not move, and after a moment the man resumed his seat opposite me; smilinga ghastly smile as he opened his great bulging valise and extracted an article of peculiar appearance—arather large cage of semi-flexible wire, woven somewhat like a baseball catcher’s mask,but shaped more like the helmet of a diving-suit. Its top was connected with a cord whose otherend remained in the valise. This device he fondled with obvious affection, cradling it in hislap as he looked at me afresh and licked his bearded lips with an almost feline motion of thetongue. Then, for the first time, he spoke—in a deep, mellow voice of softness and cultivationstartlingly at variance with his rough corduroy clothes and unkempt aspect.
“You are fortunate, sir. I shall use you first of all. You shall go intohistory as the first fruits of a remarkable invention. Vast sociological consequences—Ishall let my light shine, as it were. I’m radiating all the time, but nobody knows it.Now you shall know. Intelligent guinea-pig. Cats and burros—it worked even with a burro.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
He paused, while his bearded features underwent a convulsive motion closelysynchronised with a vigorous gyratory shaking of the whole head. It was as though he were shakingclear of some nebulous obstructing medium, for the gesture was followed by a clarification orsubtilisation of expression which hid the more obvious madness in a look of suave composurethrough which the craftiness gleamed only dimly. I glimpsed the difference at once, and putin a word to see if I could lead his mind into harmless channels.
“You seem to have a marvellously fine instrument, if I’m any judge.Won’t you tell me how you came to invent it?”
He nodded.
“Mere logical reflection, dear sir. I consulted the needs of the age andacted upon them. Others might have done the same had their minds been as powerful—thatis, as capable of sustained concentration—as mine. I had the sense of conviction—theavailable will power—that is all. I realised, as no one else has yet realised, how imperativeit is to remove everybody from the earth before Quetzalcoatl comes back, and realised also thatit must be done elegantly. I hate butchery of any kind, and hanging is barbarously crude. Youknow last year the New York legislature voted to adopt electric execution for condemned men—butall the apparatus they have in mind is as primitive as Stephenson’s ‘Rocket’or Davenport’s first electric engine. I knew of a better way, and told them so, but theypaid no attention to me. God, the fools! As if I didn’t know all there is to know aboutmen and death and electricity—student, man, and boy—technologist and engineer—soldierof fortune.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
He leaned back and narrowed his eyes.
“I was in Maximilian’s army twenty years and more ago. They weregoing to make me a nobleman. Then those damned greasers killed him and I had to go home. ButI came back—back and forth, back and forth. I live in Rochester, N.Y.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
His eyes grew deeply crafty, and he leaned forward, touching me on the kneewith the fingers of a paradoxically delicate hand.
“I came back, I say, and I went deeper than any of them. I hate greasers,but I like Mexicans! A puzzle? Listen to me, young fellow—you don’t think Mexico isreally Spanish, do you? God, if you knew the tribes I know! In the mountains—in the mountains—Anahuac—Tenochtitlan—theold ones.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
His voice changed to a chanting and not unmelodious howl.
“Iä! Huitzilopotchli!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Nahuatlacatl! Seven, seven, seven&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Xochimilca, Chalca, Tepaneca, Acolhua, Tlahuica, Tlascalteca, Azteca!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Iä! Iä!I have been to the Seven Caves of Chicomoztoc, but no one shall ever know! I tell you becauseyou will never repeat it.
He subsided, and resumed a conversational tone.
“It would surprise you to know what things are told in the mountains.Huitzilopotchli is coming back&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. of that there can be no doubt. Any peonsouth of Mexico City can tell you that. But I meant to do nothing about it. I went home, asI tell you, again and again, and was going to benefit society with my electric executioner whenthat cursed Albany legislature adopted the other way. A joke, sir, a joke! Grandfather’schair—sit by the fireside—Hawthorne—“
The man was chuckling with a morbid parody of good nature.
“Why, sir, I’d like to be the first man to sit in their damned chairand feel their little two-bit battery current! It wouldn’t make a frog’s legs dance!And they expect to kill murderers with it—reward of merit—everything! But then, youngman, I saw the uselessness—the pointless illogicality, as it were—of killing justa few. Everybody is a murderer—they murder ideas—steal inventions—stole mineby watching, and watching, and watching—“
The man choked and paused, and I spoke soothingly.
“I’m sure your invention was much the better, and probably they’llcome to use it in the end.”
Evidently my tact was not great enough, for his response shewed fresh irritation.
“‘Sure,’ are you? Nice, mild, conservative assurance! Cursedlot you care—but you’ll soon know! Why, damn you, all the good there ever willbe in that electric chair will have been stolen from me. The ghost of Nezahualpilli told methat on the sacred mountain. They watched, and watched, and watched—”
He choked again, then gave another of those gestures in which he seemed toshake both his head and his facial expression. That seemed temporarily to steady him.
“What my invention needs is testing. That is it—here. The wire hoodor head-net is flexible, and slips on easily. Neckpiece binds but doesn’t choke. Electrodestouch forehead and base of cerebellum—all that’s necessary. Stop the head, and whatelse can go? The fools up at Albany, with their carved oak easy-chair, think they’ve gotto make it a head-to-foot affair. Idiots!—don’t they know that you don’t needto shoot a man through the body after you’ve plugged him through the brain? I’ve seenmen die in battle—I know better. And then their silly high-power circuit—dynamos—allthat. Why didn’t they see what I’ve done with the storage-battery? Not a hearing—nobodyknows—I alone have the secret—that’s why I and Quetzalcoatl and Huitzilopotchliwill rule the world alone—I and they, if I choose to let them.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ButI must have experimental subjects—subjects—do you know whom I’ve chosen forthe first?”
I tried jocoseness, quickly merging into friendly seriousness, as a sedative.Quick thought and apt words might save me yet.
“Well, there are lots of fine subjects among the politicians of San Francisco,where I come from! They need your treatment, and I’d like to help you introduce it! Butreally, I think I can help you in all truth. I have some influence in Sacramento, and if you’llgo back to the States with me after I’m through with my business in Mexico, I’ll seethat you get a hearing.”
He answered soberly and civilly.
“No—I can’t go back. I swore not to when those criminals atAlbany turned down my invention and set spies to watch me and steal from me. But I must haveAmerican subjects. Those greasers are under a curse, and would be too easy; and the full-bloodIndians—the real children of the feathered serpent—are sacred and inviolate exceptfor proper sacrificial victims&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and even those must be slain according toceremony. I must have Americans without going back—and the first man I choose will be signallyhonoured. Do you know who he is?”
I temporised desperately.
“Oh, if that’s all the trouble, I’ll find you a dozen first-rateYankee specimens as soon as we get to Mexico City! I know where there are lots of small miningmen who wouldn’t be missed for days—”
But he cut me short with a new and sudden air of authority which had a touchof real dignity in it.
“That’ll do—we’ve trifled long enough. Get up and standerect like a man. You’re the subject I’ve chosen, and you’ll thank me for thehonour in the other world, just as the sacrificial victim thanks the priest for transferringhim to eternal glory. A new principle—no other man alive has dreamed of such a battery,and it might never again be hit on if the world experimented a thousand years. Do you know thatatoms aren’t what they seem? Fools! A century after this some dolt would be guessing ifI were to let the world live!”
As I arose at his command, he drew additional feet of cord from the valiseand stood erect beside me; the wire helmet outstretched toward me in both hands, and a lookof real exaltation on his tanned and bearded face. For an instant he seemed like a radiant Hellenicmystagogue or hierophant.
“Here, O Youth—a libation! Wine of the cosmos—nectar of thestarry spaces—Linos—Iacchus—Ialmenos—Zagreus—Dionysos—Atys—Hylas—sprungfrom Apollo and slain by the hounds of Argos—seed of Psamathe—child of the sun—Evoë!Evoë!”
He was chanting again, and this time his mind seemed far back amongst the classicmemories of his college days. In my erect posture I noticed the nearness of the signal cordoverhead, and wondered whether I could reach it through some gesture of ostensible responseto his ceremonial mood. It was worth trying, so with an antiphonal cry of “Evoë!”I put my arms forward and upward toward him in a ritualistic fashion, hoping to give the corda tug before he could notice the act. But it was useless. He saw my purpose, and moved one handtoward the right-hand coat pocket where my revolver lay. No words were needed, and we stoodfor a moment like carven figures. Then he quietly said, “Make haste!”
Again my mind rushed frantically about seeking avenues of escape. The doors,I knew, were not locked on Mexican trains; but my companion could easily forestall me if I triedto unlatch one and jump out. Besides, our speed was so great that success in that directionwould probably be as fatal as failure. The only thing to do was to play for time. Of the three-and-a-half-hourtrip a good slice was already worn away, and once we got to Mexico City the guards and policein the station would provide instant safety.
There would, I thought, be two distinct times for diplomatic stalling. If Icould get him to postpone the slipping on of the hood, that much time would be gained. Of courseI had no belief that the thing was really deadly; but I knew enough of madmen to understandwhat would happen when it failed to work. To his disappointment would be added a mad sense ofmy responsibility for the failure, and the result would be a red chaos of murderous rage. Thereforethe experiment must be postponed as long as possible. Yet the second opportunity did exist,for if I planned cleverly I might devise explanations for the failure which would hold his attentionand lead him into more or less extended searches for corrective influences. I wondered justhow far his credulity went, and whether I could prepare in advance a prophecy of failure whichwould make the failure itself stamp me as a seer or initiate, or perhaps a god. I had enoughof a smattering of Mexican mythology to make it worth trying; though I would try other delayinginfluences first and let the prophecy come as a sudden revelation. Would he spare me in theend if I could make him think me a prophet or divinity? Could I “get by” as Quetzalcoatlor Huitzilopotchli? Anything to drag matters out till five o’clock, when we were due inMexico City.
But my opening “stall” was the veteran will-making ruse. As the maniacrepeated his command for haste, I told him of my family and intended marriage, and asked forthe privilege of leaving a message and disposing of my money and effects. If, I said, he wouldlend me some paper and agree to mail what I should write, I could die more peacefully and willingly.After some cogitation he gave a favourable verdict and fished in his valise for a pad, whichhe handed me solemnly as I resumed my seat. I produced a pencil, artfully breaking the pointat the outset and causing some delay while he searched for one of his own. When he gave me this,he took my broken pencil and proceeded to sharpen it with a large, horn-handled knife whichhad been in his belt under his coat. Evidently a second pencil-breaking would not profit megreatly.
What I wrote, I can hardly recall at this date. It was largely gibberish, andcomposed of random scraps of memorised literature when I could think of nothing else to setdown. I made my handwriting as illegible as I could without destroying its nature as writing;for I knew he would be likely to look at the result before commencing his experiment, and realisedhow he would react to the sight of obvious nonsense. The ordeal was a terrible one, and I chafedeach second at the slowness of the train. In the past I had often whistled a brisk gallop tothe sprightly “tac” of wheels on rails, but now the tempo seemed slowed down to thatof a funeral march—my funeral march, I grimly reflected.
My ruse worked till I had covered over four pages, six by nine; when at lastthe madman drew out his watch and told me I could have but five minutes more. What should Ido next? I was hastily going through the form of concluding the will when a new idea struckme. Ending with a flourish and handing him the finished sheets, which he thrust carelessly intohis left-hand coat pocket, I reminded him of my influential Sacramento friends who would beso much interested in his invention.
“Oughtn’t I to give you a letter of introduction to them?” Isaid “Oughtn’t I to make a signed sketch and description of your executioner so thatthey’ll grant you a cordial hearing? They can make you famous, you know—and there’sno question at all but that they’ll adopt your method for the state of California if theyhear of it through someone like me, whom they know and trust.”
I was taking this tack on the chance that his thoughts as a disappointed inventorwould let him forget the Aztec-religious side of his mania for a while. When he veered to thelatter again, I reflected, I would spring the “revelation” and “prophecy”.The scheme worked, for his eyes glowed an eager assent, though he brusquely told me to be quick.He further emptied the valise, lifting out a queer-looking congeries of glass cells and coilsto which the wire from the helmet was attached, and delivering a fire of running comment tootechnical for me to follow yet apparently quite plausible and straightforward. I pretended tonote down all he said, wondering as I did so whether the queer apparatus was really a batteryafter all. Would I get a slight shock when he applied the device? The man surely talked as ifhe were a genuine electrician. Description of his own invention was clearly a congenial taskfor him, and I saw he was not as impatient as before. The hopeful grey of dawn glimmered redthrough the windows before he wound up, and I felt at last that my chance of escape had reallybecome tangible.
But he, too, saw the dawn, and began glaring wildly again. He knew the trainwas due in Mexico City at five, and would certainly force quick action unless I could overrideall his judgment with engrossing ideas. As he rose with a determined air, setting the batteryon the seat beside the open valise, I reminded him that I had not made the needed sketch; andasked him to hold the headpiece so that I could draw it near the battery. He complied and resumedhis seat, with many admonitions to me to hurry. After another moment I paused for some information,asking him how the victim was placed for execution, and how his presumable struggles wereovercome.
“Why,” he replied, “the criminal is securely strapped to a post.It does not matter how much he tosses his head, for the helmet fits tightly and draws even closerwhen the current comes on. We turn the switch gradually—you see it here, a carefully arrangedaffair with a rheostat.”
A new idea for delay occurred to me as the tilled fields and increasingly frequenthouses in the dawnlight outside told of our approach to the capital at last.
“But,” I said, “I must draw the helmet in place on a human headas well as beside the battery. Can’t you slip it on yourself a moment so that I can sketchyou with it? The papers as well as the officials will want all this, and they are strong oncompleteness.”
I had, by chance, made a better shot than I had planned; for at my mentionof the press the madman’s eyes lit up afresh.
“The papers? Yes—damn them, you can make even the papers give mea hearing! They all laughed at me and wouldn’t print a word. Here, you, hurry up! We’venot a second to lose!”
He had slipped the headpiece on and was watching my flying pencil avidly. Thewire mesh gave him a grotesque, comic look as he sat there with nervously twitching hands.
“Now, curse ’em, they’ll print pictures! I’ll revise yoursketch if you make any blunders—must be accurate at any cost. Police will find you afterward—they’lltell how it works. Associated Press item—back up your letter—immortal fame.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Hurry, I say—hurry, confound you!”
The train was lurching over the poorer roadbed near the city and we swayeddisconcertingly now and then. With this excuse I managed to break the pencil again, but of coursethe maniac at once handed me my own which he had sharpened. My first batch of ruses was aboutused up, and I felt that I should have to submit to the headpiece in a moment. We were stilla good quarter-hour from the terminal, and it was about time for me to divert my companion tohis religious side and spring the divine prophecy.
Mustering up my scraps of Nahuan-Aztec mythology, I suddenly threw down penciland paper and commenced to chant.
“Iä! Iä! Tloquenahuaque, Thou Who Art All In Thyself! Thou too, Ipalnemoan,By Whom We Live! I hear, I hear! I see, I see! Serpent-bearing Eagle, hail! A message! A message!Huitzilopotchli, in my soul echoes thy thunder!”
At my intonations the maniac stared incredulously through his odd mask, hishandsome face shewn in a surprise and perplexity which quickly changed to alarm. His mind seemedto go blank a moment, and then to recrystallise in another pattern. Raising his hands aloft,he chanted as if in a dream.
“Mictlanteuctli, Great Lord, a sign! A sign from within thy black cave!Iä! Tonatiuh-Metztli! Cthulhutl! Command, and I serve!”
Now in all this responsive gibberish there was one word which struck an oddchord in my memory. Odd, because it never occurs in any printed account of Mexican mythology,yet had been overheard by me more than once as an awestruck whisper amongst the peons in myown firm’s Tlaxcala mines. It seemed to be part of an exceedingly secret and ancient ritual;for there were characteristic whispered responses which I had caught now and then, and whichwere as unknown as itself to academic scholarship. This maniac must have spent considerabletime with the hill peons and Indians, just as he had said; for surely such unrecorded lore couldhave come from no mere book-learning. Realising the importance he must attach to this doublyesoteric jargon, I determined to strike at his most vulnerable spot and give him the gibberishresponses the natives used.
“Ya-R’lyeh! Ya-R’lyeh!” I shouted. “Cthulhutl fhtaghn!Niguratl-Yig! Yog-Sototl—“
But I never had a chance to finish. Galvanised into a religious epilepsy bythe exact response which his subconscious mind had probably not really expected, the madmanscrambled down to a kneeling posture on the floor, bowing his wire-helmeted head again and again,and turning it to the right and left as he did so. With each turn his obeisances became moreprofound, and I could hear his foaming lips repeating the syllable “kill, kill, kill,”in a rapidly swelling monotone. It occurred to me that I had overreached myself, and that myresponse had unloosed a mounting mania which would rouse him to the slaying-point before thetrain reached the station.
As the arc of the madman’s turnings gradually increased, the slack inthe cord from his headpiece to the battery had naturally been taken up more and more. Now, inan all-forgetting delirium of ecstasy, he began to magnify his turns to complete circles, sothat the cord wound round his neck and began to tug at its moorings to the battery on the seat.I wondered what he would do when the inevitable would happen, and the battery would be draggedto presumable destruction on the floor.
Then came the sudden cataclysm. The battery, yanked over the seat’s edgeby the maniac’s last gesture of orgiastic frenzy, did indeed fall; but it did not seemto have wholly broken. Instead, as my eye caught the spectacle in one too-fleeting instant,the actual impact was borne by the rheostat, so that the switch was jerked over instantly tofull current. And the marvellous thing is that there was a current. The invention wasno mere dream of insanity.
I saw a blinding blue auroral coruscation, heard an ululating shriek more hideousthan any of the previous cries of that mad, horrible journey, and smelled the nauseous odourof burning flesh. That was all my overwrought consciousness could bear, and I sank instantlyinto oblivion.
When the train guard at Mexico City revived me, I found a crowd on the stationplatform around my compartment door. At my involuntary cry the pressing faces became curiousand dubious, and I was glad when the guard shut out all but the trim doctor who had pushed hisway through to me. My cry was a very natural thing, but it had been prompted by something morethan the shocking sight on the carriage floor which I had expected to see. Or should say, bysomething less, because in truth there was not anything on the floor at all.
Nor, said the guard, had there been when he opened the door and found me unconsciouswithin. My ticket was the only one sold for that compartment, and I was the only person foundwithin it. Just myself and my valise, nothing more. I had been alone all the way from Querétaro.Guard, doctor, and spectators alike tapped their foreheads significantly at my frantic and insistentquestions.
Had it all been a dream, or was I indeed mad? I recalled my anxiety and overwroughtnerves, and shuddered. Thanking the guard and doctor, and shaking free of the curious crowd,I staggered into a cab and was taken to the Fonda Nacional, where, after telegraphing Jacksonat the mine, I slept till afternoon in an effort to get a fresh grip on myself. I had myselfcalled at one o’clock, in time to catch the narrow-gauge for the mining country, but whenI got up I found a telegram under the door. It was from Jackson, and said that Feldon had beenfound dead in the mountains that morning, the news reaching the mine about ten o’clock.The papers were all safe, and the San Francisco office had been duly notified. So the wholetrip, with its nervous haste and harrowing mental ordeal, had been for nothing!
Knowing that McComb would expect a personal report despite the course of events,I sent another wire ahead and took the narrow-gauge after all. Four hours later I was rattledand jolted into the station of Mine No. 3, where Jackson was waiting to give a cordial greeting.He was so full of the affair at the mine that he did not notice my still shaken and seedy appearance.
The superintendent’s story was brief, and he told me it as he led me towardthe shack up the hillside above the arrastre, where Feldon’s body lay. Feldon, hesaid, had always been a queer, sullen character, ever since he was hired the year before; workingat some secret mechanical device and complaining of constant espionage, and being disgustinglyfamiliar with the native workmen. But he certainly knew the work, the country, and the people.He used to make long trips into the hills where the peons lived, and even to take part in someof their ancient, heathenish ceremonies. He hinted at odd secrets and strange powers as oftenas he boasted of his mechanical skill. Of late he had disintegrated rapidly; growing morbidlysuspicious of his colleagues, and undoubtedly joining his native friends in ore-thieving afterhis cash got low. He needed unholy amounts of money for something or other—was always havingboxes come from laboratories and machine shops in Mexico City or the States.
As for the final absconding with all the papers—it was only a crazy gestureof revenge for what he called “spying”. He was certainly stark mad, for he had goneacross country to a hidden cave on the wild slope of the haunted Sierra de Malinche, where nowhite men live, and had done some amazingly queer things. The cave, which would never have beenfound but for the final tragedy, was full of hideous old Aztec idols and altars; the lattercovered with the charred bones of recent burnt-offerings of doubtful nature. The natives wouldtell nothing—indeed, they swore they knew nothing—but it was easy to see that thecave was an old rendezvous of theirs, and that Feldon had shared their practices to the fullestextent.
The searchers had found the place only because of the chanting and the finalcry. It had been close to five that morning, and after an all-night encampment the party hadbegun to pack up for its empty-handed return to the mines. Then somebody had heard faint rhythmsin the distance, and knew that one of the noxious old native rituals was being howled from somelonely spot up the slope of the corpse-shaped mountain. They heard the same old names—Mictlanteuctli,Tonatiuh-Metzli, Cthulhutl, Ya-R’lyeh, and all the rest—but the queer thing was thatsome English words were mixed with them. Real white man’s English, and no greaser patter.Guided by the sound, they had hastened up the weed-entangled mountainside toward it, when aftera spell of quiet the shriek had burst upon them. It was a terrible thing—a worse thingthan any of them had ever heard before. There seemed to be some smoke, too, and a morbid acridsmell.
Then they stumbled on the cave, its entrance screened by scrub mesquites, butnow emitting clouds of foetid smoke. It was lighted within, the horrible altars and grotesqueimages revealed flickeringly by candles which must have been changed less than a half-hour before;and on the gravelly floor lay the horror that made all the crowd reel backward. It was Feldon,head burned to a crisp by some odd device he had slipped over it—a kind of wire cage connectedwith a rather shaken-up battery which had evidently fallen to the floor from a nearby altar-pot.When the men saw it they exchanged glances, thinking of the “electric executioner”Feldon had always boasted of inventing—the thing which everyone had rejected, but had triedto steal and copy. The papers were safe in Feldon’s open portmanteau which stood closeby, and an hour later the column of searchers started back for No. 3 with a grisly burden onan improvised stretcher.
That was all, but it was enough to make me turn pale and falter as Jacksonled me up past the arrastre to the shed where he said the body lay. For I was not withoutimagination, and knew only too well into what hellish nightmare this tragedy somehow supernaturallydovetailed. I knew what I should see inside that gaping door around which the curious minersclustered, and did not flinch when my eyes took in the giant form, the rough corduroy clothes,the oddly delicate hands, the wisps of burnt beard, and the hellish machine itself—batteryslightly broken, and headpiece blackened by the charring of what was inside. The great, bulgingportmanteau did not surprise me, and I quailed only at two things—the folded sheets ofpaper sticking out of the left-hand pocket, and the queer sagging of the corresponding right-handpocket. In a moment when no one was looking I reached out and seized the too familiar sheets,crushing them in my hand without daring to look at their penmanship. I ought to be sorry nowthat a kind of panic fear made me burn them that night with averted eyes. They would have beena positive proof or disproof of something—but for that matter I could still have had proofby asking about the revolver the coroner afterward took from that sagging right-hand coat pocket.I never had the courage to ask about that—because my own revolver was missing after thenight on the train. My pocket pencil, too, shewed signs of a crude and hasty sharpening unlikethe precise pointing I had given it Friday afternoon on the machine in President McComb’sprivate car.
So in the end I went home still puzzled—mercifully puzzled, perhaps. Theprivate car was repaired when I got back to Querétaro, but my greatest relief was crossingthe Rio Grande into El Paso and the States. By the next Friday I was in San Francisco again,and the postponed wedding came off the following week.
As to what really happened that night—as I’ve said, I simply don’tdare to speculate. That chap Feldon was insane to start with, and on top of his insanity hehad piled a lot of prehistoric Aztec witch-lore that nobody has any right to know. He was reallyan inventive genius, and that battery must have been the genuine stuff. I heard later how hehad been brushed aside in former years by press, public, and potentates alike. Too much disappointmentisn’t good for men of a certain kind. Anyhow, some unholy combination of influences wasat work. He had really, by the way, been a soldier of Maximilian’s.
When I tell my story most people call me a plain liar. Others lay it to abnormalpsychology—and heaven knows I was overwrought—while still others talk of “astralprojection” of some sort. My zeal to catch Feldon certainly sent my thoughts ahead towardhim, and with all his Indian magic he’d be about the first one to recognise and meet them.Was he in the railway carriage or was I in the cave on the corpse-shaped haunted mountain? Whatwould have happened to me, had I not delayed him as I did? I’ll confess I don’t know,and I’m not sure that I want to know. I’ve never been in Mexico since—and asI said at the start, I don’t enjoy hearing about electric executions.
