I repeat to you, gentlemen, that your inquisition is fruitless. Detain me here forever if youwill; confine or execute me if you must have a victim to propitiate the illusion you call justice;but I can say no more than I have said already. Everything that I can remember, I have toldwith perfect candour. Nothing has been distorted or concealed, and if anything remains vague,it is only because of the dark cloud which has come over my mind—that cloud and the nebulousnature of the horrors which brought it upon me.
Again I say, I do not know what has become of Harley Warren; though I think—almosthope—that he is in peaceful oblivion, if there be anywhere so blessed a thing. It is truethat I have for five years been his closest friend, and a partial sharer of his terrible researchesinto the unknown. I will not deny, though my memory is uncertain and indistinct, that this witnessof yours may have seen us together as he says, on the Gainesville pike, walking toward Big CypressSwamp, at half past eleven on that awful night. That we bore electric lanterns, spades, anda curious coil of wire with attached instruments, I will even affirm; for these things all playeda part in the single hideous scene which remains burned into my shaken recollection. But ofwhat followed, and of the reason I was found alone and dazed on the edge of the swamp next morning,I must insist that I know nothing save what I have told you over and over again. You say tome that there is nothing in the swamp or near it which could form the setting of that frightfulepisode. I reply that I know nothing beyond what I saw. Vision or nightmare it may have been—visionor nightmare I fervently hope it was—yet it is all that my mind retains of what took placein those shocking hours after we left the sight of men. And why Harley Warren did not return,he or his shade—or some nameless thing I cannot describe—alone can tell.
As I have said before, the weird studies of Harley Warren were well known tome, and to some extent shared by me. Of his vast collection of strange, rare books on forbiddensubjects I have read all that are written in the languages of which I am master; but these arefew as compared with those in languages I cannot understand. Most, I believe, are in Arabic;and the fiend-inspired book which brought on the end—the book which he carried in hispocket out of the world—was written in characters whose like I never saw elsewhere. Warrenwould never tell me just what was in that book. As to the nature of our studies—must Isay again that I no longer retain full comprehension? It seems to me rather merciful that Ido not, for they were terrible studies, which I pursued more through reluctant fascination thanthrough actual inclination. Warren always dominated me, and sometimes I feared him. I rememberhow I shuddered at his facial expression on the night before the awful happening, when he talkedso incessantly of his theory, why certain corpses never decay, but rest firm and fat in theirtombs for a thousand years. But I do not fear him now, for I suspect that he has known horrorsbeyond my ken. Now I fear for him.
Once more I say that I have no clear idea of our object on that night. Certainly,it had much to do with something in the book which Warren carried with him—that ancientbook in undecipherable characters which had come to him from India a month before—butI swear I do not know what it was that we expected to find. Your witness says he saw us at halfpast eleven on the Gainesville pike, headed for Big Cypress Swamp. This is probably true, butI have no distinct memory of it. The picture seared into my soul is of one scene only, and thehour must have been long after midnight; for a waning crescent moon was high in the vaporousheavens.
The place was an ancient cemetery; so ancient that I trembled at the manifoldsigns of immemorial years. It was in a deep, damp hollow, overgrown with rank grass, moss, andcurious creeping weeds, and filled with a vague stench which my idle fancy associated absurdlywith rotting stone. On every hand were the signs of neglect and decrepitude, and I seemed hauntedby the notion that Warren and I were the first living creatures to invade a lethal silence ofcenturies. Over the valley’s rim a wan, waning crescent moon peered through the noisomevapours that seemed to emanate from unheard-of catacombs, and by its feeble, wavering beamsI could distinguish a repellent array of antique slabs, urns, cenotaphs, and mausolean facades;all crumbling, moss-grown, and moisture-stained, and partly concealed by the gross luxurianceof the unhealthy vegetation. My first vivid impression of my own presence in this terrible necropolisconcerns the act of pausing with Warren before a certain half-obliterated sepulchre, and ofthrowing down some burdens which we seemed to have been carrying. I now observed that I hadwith me an electric lantern and two spades, whilst my companion was supplied with a similarlantern and a portable telephone outfit. No word was uttered, for the spot and the task seemedknown to us; and without delay we seized our spades and commenced to clear away the grass, weeds,and drifted earth from the flat, archaic mortuary. After uncovering the entire surface, whichconsisted of three immense granite slabs, we stepped back some distance to survey the charnelscene; and Warren appeared to make some mental calculations. Then he returned to the sepulchre,and using his spade as a lever, sought to pry up the slab lying nearest to a stony ruin whichmay have been a monument in its day. He did not succeed, and motioned to me to come to his assistance.Finally our combined strength loosened the stone, which we raised and tipped to one side.
The removal of the slab revealed a black aperture, from which rushed an effluenceof miasmal gases so nauseous that we started back in horror. After an interval, however, weapproached the pit again, and found the exhalations less unbearable. Our lanterns disclosedthe top of a flight of stone steps, dripping with some detestable ichor of the inner earth,and bordered by moist walls encrusted with nitre. And now for the first time my memory recordsverbal discourse, Warren addressing me at length in his mellow tenor voice; a voice singularlyunperturbed by our awesome surroundings.
“I’m sorry to have to ask you to stay on the surface,” hesaid, “but it would be a crime to let anyone with your frail nerves go down there. Youcan’t imagine, even from what you have read and from what I’ve told you, the thingsI shall have to see and do. It’s fiendish work, Carter, and I doubt if any man withoutironclad sensibilities could ever see it through and come up alive and sane. I don’t wishto offend you, and heaven knows I’d be glad enough to have you with me; but the responsibilityis in a certain sense mine, and I couldn’t drag a bundle of nerves like you down to probabledeath or madness. I tell you, you can’t imagine what the thing is really like! But I promiseto keep you informed over the telephone of every move—you see I’ve enough wire hereto reach to the centre of the earth and back!”
I can still hear, in memory, those coolly spoken words; and I can still remembermy remonstrances. I seemed desperately anxious to accompany my friend into those sepulchraldepths, yet he proved inflexibly obdurate. At one time he threatened to abandon the expeditionif I remained insistent; a threat which proved effective, since he alone held the key to thething. All this I can still remember, though I no longer know what manner of thingwe sought. After he had secured my reluctant acquiescence in his design, Warren picked up thereel of wire and adjusted the instruments. At his nod I took one of the latter and seated myselfupon an aged, discoloured gravestone close by the newly uncovered aperture. Then he shook myhand, shouldered the coil of wire, and disappeared within that indescribable ossuary. For amoment I kept sight of the glow of his lantern, and heard the rustle of the wire as he laidit down after him; but the glow soon disappeared abruptly, as if a turn in the stone staircasehad been encountered, and the sound died away almost as quickly. I was alone, yet bound to theunknown depths by those magic strands whose insulated surface lay green beneath the strugglingbeams of that waning crescent moon.
In the lone silence of that hoary and deserted city of the dead, my mind conceivedthe most ghastly phantasies and illusions; and the grotesque shrines and monoliths seemed toassume a hideous personality—a half-sentience. Amorphous shadows seemed to lurk in thedarker recesses of the weed-choked hollow and to flit as in some blasphemous ceremonial processionpast the portals of the mouldering tombs in the hillside; shadows which could not have beencast by that pallid, peering crescent moon. I constantly consulted my watch by the light ofmy electric lantern, and listened with feverish anxiety at the receiver of the telephone; butfor more than a quarter of an hour heard nothing. Then a faint clicking came from the instrument,and I called down to my friend in a tense voice. Apprehensive as I was, I was nevertheless unpreparedfor the words which came up from that uncanny vault in accents more alarmed and quivering thanany I had heard before from Harley Warren. He who had so calmly left me a little while previously,now called from below in a shaky whisper more portentous than the loudest shriek:
“God! If you could see what I am seeing!”
I could not answer. Speechless, I could only wait. Then came the frenzied tonesagain:
“Carter, it’s terrible—monstrous—unbelievable!”
This time my voice did not fail me, and I poured into the transmitter a floodof excited questions. Terrified, I continued to repeat, “Warren, what is it? What is it?”
Once more came the voice of my friend, still hoarse with fear, and now apparentlytinged with despair:
“I can’t tell you, Carter! It’s too utterly beyond thought—Idare not tell you—no man could know it and live—Great God! I never dreamed of THIS!”Stillness again, save for my now incoherent torrent of shuddering inquiry. Then the voice ofWarren in a pitch of wilder consternation:
“Carter! for the love of God, put back the slab and get out of thisif you can! Quick!—leave everything else and make for the outside—it’s youronly chance! Do as I say, and don’t ask me to explain!”
I heard, yet was able only to repeat my frantic questions. Around me were thetombs and the darkness and the shadows; below me, some peril beyond the radius of the humanimagination. But my friend was in greater danger than I, and through my fear I felt a vagueresentment that he should deem me capable of deserting him under such circumstances. More clicking,and after a pause a piteous cry from Warren:
“Beat it! For God’s sake, put back the slab and beat it, Carter!”
Something in the boyish slang of my evidently stricken companion unleashedmy faculties. I formed and shouted a resolution, “Warren, brace up! I’m coming down!”But at this offer the tone of my auditor changed to a scream of utter despair:
“Don’t! You can’t understand! It’s too late—andmy own fault. Put back the slab and run—there’s nothing else you or anyone can donow!” The tone changed again, this time acquiring a softer quality, as of hopelessresignation. Yet it remained tense through anxiety for me.
“Quick—before it’s too late!” I tried not toheed him; tried to break through the paralysis which held me, and to fulfil my vow to rush downto his aid. But his next whisper found me still held inert in the chains of stark horror.
“Carter—hurry! It’s no use—you must go—betterone than two—the slab—” A pause, more clicking, then the faint voice ofWarren:
“Nearly over now—don’t make it harder—cover up thosedamned steps and run for your life—you’re losing time— So long, Carter—won’tsee you again.” Here Warren’s whisper swelled into a cry; a cry that graduallyrose to a shriek fraught with all the horror of the ages—
“Curse these hellish things—legions— My God! Beat it!Beat it! Beat it!”
After that was silence. I know not how many interminable aeons I sat stupefied;whispering, muttering, calling, screaming into that telephone. Over and over again through thoseaeons I whispered and muttered, called, shouted, and screamed, “Warren! Warren! Answerme—are you there?”
And then there came to me the crowning horror of all—the unbelievable,unthinkable, almost unmentionable thing. I have said that aeons seemed to elapse after Warrenshrieked forth his last despairing warning, and that only my own cries now broke the hideoussilence. But after a while there was a further clicking in the receiver, and I strained my earsto listen. Again I called down, “Warren, are you there?”, and in answer heard thething which has brought this cloud over my mind. I do not try, gentlemen, to accountfor that thing—that voice—nor can I venture to describe it in detail, sincethe first words took away my consciousness and created a mental blank which reaches to the timeof my awakening in the hospital. Shall I say that the voice was deep; hollow; gelatinous; remote;unearthly; inhuman; disembodied? What shall I say? It was the end of my experience, and is theend of my story. I heard it, and knew no more. Heard it as I sat petrified in that unknown cemeteryin the hollow, amidst the crumbling stones and the falling tombs, the rank vegetation and themiasmal vapours. Heard it well up from the innermost depths of that damnable open sepulchreas I watched amorphous, necrophagous shadows dance beneath an accursed waning moon. And thisis what it said:
“YOU FOOL, WARREN IS DEAD!”
