I.

After twenty-two years of nightmare and terror, saved only by a desperate conviction of themythical source of certain impressions, I am unwilling to vouch for the truth of that whichI think I found in Western Australia on the night of July 17–18, 1935. There is reasonto hope that my experience was wholly or partly an hallucination—for which, indeed, abundantcauses existed. And yet, its realism was so hideous that I sometimes find hope impossible. Ifthe thing did happen, then man must be prepared to accept notions of the cosmos, and of hisown place in the seething vortex of time, whose merest mention is paralysing. He must, too,be placed on guard against a specific lurking peril which, though it will never engulf the wholerace, may impose monstrous and unguessable horrors upon certain venturesome members of it. Itis for this latter reason that I urge, with all the force of my being, a final abandonment ofall attempts at unearthing those fragments of unknown, primordial masonry which my expeditionset out to investigate.
Assuming that I was sane and awake, my experience on that night was such ashas befallen no man before. It was, moreover, a frightful confirmation of all I had sought todismiss as myth and dream. Mercifully there is no proof, for in my fright I lost the awesomeobject which would—if real and brought out of that noxious abyss—have formed irrefutableevidence. When I came upon the horror I was alone—and I have up to now told no one aboutit. I could not stop the others from digging in its direction, but chance and the shifting sandhave so far saved them from finding it. Now I must formulate some definitive statement—notonly for the sake of my own mental balance, but to warn such others as may read it seriously.
These pages—much in whose earlier parts will be familiar to close readersof the general and scientific press—are written in the cabin of the ship that is bringingme home. I shall give them to my son, Prof. Wingate Peaslee of Miskatonic University—theonly member of my family who stuck to me after my queer amnesia of long ago, and the man bestinformed on the inner facts of my case. Of all living persons, he is least likely to ridiculewhat I shall tell of that fateful night. I did not enlighten him orally before sailing, becauseI think he had better have the revelation in written form. Reading and re-reading at leisurewill leave with him a more convincing picture than my confused tongue could hope to convey.He can do as he thinks best with this account—shewing it, with suitable comment, to anyquarters where it will be likely to accomplish good. It is for the sake of such readers as areunfamiliar with the earlier phases of my case that I am prefacing the revelation itself witha fairly ample summary of its background.
My name is Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee, and those who recall the newspaper talesof a generation back—or the letters and articles in psychological journals six or sevenyears ago—will know who and what I am. The press was filled with the details of my strangeamnesia in 1908–13, and much was made of the traditions of horror, madness, and witchcraftwhich lurk behind the ancient Massachusetts town then and now forming my place of residence.Yet I would have it known that there is nothing whatever of the mad or sinister in my heredityand early life. This is a highly important fact in view of the shadow which fell so suddenlyupon me from outside sources. It may be that centuries of dark brooding had given tocrumbling, whisper-haunted Arkham a peculiar vulnerability as regards such shadows—thougheven this seems doubtful in the light of those other cases which I later came to study. Butthe chief point is that my own ancestry and background are altogether normal. What came, camefrom somewhere else—where, I even now hesitate to assert in plain words.
I am the son of Jonathan and Hannah (Wingate) Peaslee, both of wholesome oldHaverhill stock. I was born and reared in Haverhill—at the old homestead in Boardman Streetnear Golden Hill—and did not go to Arkham till I entered Miskatonic University at theage of eighteen. That was in 1889. After my graduation I studied economics at Harvard, and cameback to Miskatonic as Instructor of Political Economy in 1895. For thirteen years more my liferan smoothly and happily. I married Alice Keezar of Haverhill in 1896, and my three children,Robert K., Wingate, and Hannah, were born in 1898, 1900, and 1903, respectively. In 1898 I becamean associate professor, and in 1902 a full professor. At no time had I the least interest ineither occultism or abnormal psychology.
It was on Thursday, May 14, 1908, that the queer amnesia came. The thing wasquite sudden, though later I realised that certain brief, glimmering visions of several hoursprevious—chaotic visions which disturbed me greatly because they were so unprecedented—musthave formed premonitory symptoms. My head was aching, and I had a singular feeling—altogethernew to me—that someone else was trying to get possession of my thoughts. 
The collapse occurred about 10:20 a.m., while I was conducting a class in PoliticalEconomy VI—history and present tendencies of economics—for juniors and a few sophomores.I began to see strange shapes before my eyes, and to feel that I was in a grotesque room otherthan the classroom. My thoughts and speech wandered from my subject, and the students saw thatsomething was gravely amiss. Then I slumped down, unconscious in my chair, in a stupor fromwhich no one could arouse me. Nor did my rightful faculties again look out upon the daylightof our normal world for five years, four months, and thirteen days.
It is, of course, from others that I have learned what followed. I shewed nosign of consciousness for sixteen and a half hours, though removed to my home at 27 Crane St.and given the best of medical attention. At 3 a.m. May 15 my eyes opened and I began to speak,but before long the doctors and my family were thoroughly frightened by the trend of my expressionand language. It was clear that I had no remembrance of my identity or of my past, though forsome reason I seemed anxious to conceal this lack of knowledge. My eyes gazed strangely at thepersons around me, and the flexions of my facial muscles were altogether unfamiliar.
Even my speech seemed awkward and foreign. I used my vocal organs clumsilyand gropingly, and my diction had a curiously stilted quality, as if I had laboriously learnedthe English language from books. The pronunciation was barbarously alien, whilst the idiom seemedto include both scraps of curious archaism and expressions of a wholly incomprehensible cast.Of the latter one in particular was very potently—even terrifiedly—recalled by theyoungest of the physicians twenty years afterward. For at that late period such a phrase beganto have an actual currency—first in England and then in the United States—and thoughof much complexity and indisputable newness, it reproduced in every least particular the mystifyingwords of the strange Arkham patient of 1908.
Physical strength returned at once, although I required an odd amount of re-educationin the use of my hands, legs, and bodily apparatus in general. Because of this and other handicapsinherent in the mnemonic lapse, I was for some time kept under strict medical care. When I sawthat my attempts to conceal the lapse had failed, I admitted it openly, and became eager forinformation of all sorts. Indeed, it seemed to the doctors that I had lost interest in my properpersonality as soon as I found the case of amnesia accepted as a natural thing. They noticedthat my chief efforts were to master certain points in history, science, art, language, andfolklore—some of them tremendously abstruse, and some childishly simple—which remained,very oddly in many cases, outside my consciousness.
At the same time they noticed that I had an inexplicable command of many almostunknown sorts of knowledge—a command which I seemed to wish to hide rather than display.I would inadvertently refer, with casual assurance, to specific events in dim ages outside therange of accepted history—passing off such references as a jest when I saw the surprisethey created. And I had a way of speaking of the future which two or three times caused actualfright. These uncanny flashes soon ceased to appear, though some observers laid their vanishmentmore to a certain furtive caution on my part than to any waning of the strange knowledge behindthem. Indeed, I seemed anomalously avid to absorb the speech, customs, and perspectives of theage around me; as if I were a studious traveller from a far, foreign land.
As soon as permitted, I haunted the college library at all hours; and shortlybegan to arrange for those odd travels, and special courses at American and European universities,which evoked so much comment during the next few years. I did not at any time suffer from alack of learned contacts, for my case had a mild celebrity among the psychologists of the period.I was lectured upon as a typical example of secondary personality—even though I seemedto puzzle the lecturers now and then with some bizarre symptom or some queer trace of carefullyveiled mockery.
Of real friendliness, however, I encountered little. Something in my aspectand speech seemed to excite vague fears and aversions in everyone I met, as if I were a beinginfinitely removed from all that is normal and healthful. This idea of a black, hidden horrorconnected with incalculable gulfs of some sort of distance was oddly widespread and persistent.My own family formed no exception. From the moment of my strange waking my wife had regardedme with extreme horror and loathing, vowing that I was some utter alien usurping the body ofher husband. In 1910 she obtained a legal divorce, nor would she ever consent to see me evenafter my return to normalcy in 1913. These feelings were shared by my elder son and my smalldaughter, neither of whom I have ever seen since.
Only my second son Wingate seemed able to conquer the terror and repulsionwhich my change aroused. He indeed felt that I was a stranger, but though only eight years oldheld fast to a faith that my proper self would return. When it did return he sought me out,and the courts gave me his custody. In succeeding years he helped me with the studies to whichI was driven, and today at thirty-five he is a professor of psychology at Miskatonic. But Ido not wonder at the horror I caused—for certainly, the mind, voice, and facial expressionof the being that awaked on May 15, 1908 were not those of Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee.
I will not attempt to tell much of my life from 1908 to 1913, since readersmay glean all the outward essentials—as I largely had to do—from files of old newspapersand scientific journals. I was given charge of my funds, and spent them slowly and on the wholewisely, in travel and in study at various centres of learning. My travels, however, were singularin the extreme; involving long visits to remote and desolate places. In 1909 I spent a monthin the Himalayas, and in 1911 aroused much attention through a camel trip into the unknown desertsof Arabia. What happened on those journeys I have never been able to learn. During the summerof 1912 I chartered a ship and sailed in the Arctic north of Spitzbergen, afterward shewingsigns of disappointment. Later in that year I spent weeks alone beyond the limits of previousor subsequent exploration in the vast limestone cavern systems of western Virginia—blacklabyrinths so complex that no retracing of my steps could even be considered.
My sojourns at the universities were marked by abnormally rapid assimilation,as if the secondary personality had an intelligence enormously superior to my own. I have found,also, that my rate of reading and solitary study was phenomenal. I could master every detailof a book merely by glancing over it as fast as I could turn the leaves; while my skill at interpretingcomplex figures in an instant was veritably awesome. At times there appeared almost ugly reportsof my power to influence the thoughts and acts of others, though I seemed to have taken careto minimise displays of this faculty.
Other ugly reports concerned my intimacy with leaders of occultist groups,and scholars suspected of connexion with nameless bands of abhorrent elder-world hierophants.These rumours, though never proved at the time, were doubtless stimulated by the known tenorof some of my reading—for the consultation of rare books at libraries cannot be effectedsecretly. There is tangible proof—in the form of marginal notes—that I went minutelythrough such things as the Comte d’Erlette’s Cultes des Goules, Ludvig Prinn’sDe Vermis Mysteriis, the Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, the survivingfragments of the puzzling Book of Eibon, and the dreaded Necronomicon of the madArab Abdul Alhazred. Then, too, it is undeniable that a fresh and evil wave of underground cultactivity set in about the time of my odd mutation.
In the summer of 1913 I began to display signs of ennui and flagging interest,and to hint to various associates that a change might soon be expected in me. I spoke of returningmemories of my earlier life—though most auditors judged me insincere, since all the recollectionsI gave were casual, and such as might have been learned from my old private papers. About themiddle of August I returned to Arkham and reopened my long-closed house in Crane St. Here Iinstalled a mechanism of the most curious aspect, constructed piecemeal by different makersof scientific apparatus in Europe and America, and guarded carefully from the sight of anyoneintelligent enough to analyse it. Those who did see it—a workman, a servant, and the newhousekeeper—say that it was a queer mixture of rods, wheels, and mirrors, though onlyabout two feet tall, one foot wide, and one foot thick. The central mirror was circular andconvex. All this is borne out by such makers of parts as can be located.
On the evening of Friday, Sept. 26, I dismissed the housekeeper and the maidtill noon of the next day. Lights burned in the house till late, and a lean, dark, curiouslyforeign-looking man called in an automobile. It was about 1 a.m. that the lights were last seen.At 2:15 a.m. a policeman observed the place in darkness, but with the stranger’s motorstill at the curb. By four o’clock the motor was certainly gone. It was at six that ahesitant, foreign voice on the telephone asked Dr. Wilson to call at my house and bring me outof a peculiar faint. This call—a long-distance one—was later traced to a publicbooth in the North Station in Boston, but no sign of the lean foreigner was ever unearthed.
When the doctor reached my house he found me unconscious in the sitting-room—inan easy-chair with a table drawn up before it. On the polished table-top were scratches shewingwhere some heavy object had rested. The queer machine was gone, nor was anything afterward heardof it. Undoubtedly the dark, lean foreigner had taken it away. In the library grate were abundantashes evidently left from the burning of every remaining scrap of paper on which I had writtensince the advent of the amnesia. Dr. Wilson found my breathing very peculiar, but after an hypodermicinjection it became more regular.
At 11:15 a.m., Sept. 27, I stirred vigorously, and my hitherto mask-like facebegan to shew signs of expression. Dr. Wilson remarked that the expression was not that of mysecondary personality, but seemed much like that of my normal self. About 11:30 I muttered somevery curious syllables—syllables which seemed unrelated to any human speech. I appeared,too, to struggle against something. Then, just after noon—the housekeeper and the maidhaving meanwhile returned—I began to mutter in English.
“.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. of the orthodox economists of that period, Jevons typifiesthe prevailing trend toward scientific correlation. His attempt to link the commercial cycleof prosperity and depression with the physical cycle of the solar spots forms perhaps the apexof&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee had come back—a spirit in whose time-scaleit was still that Thursday morning in 1908, with the economics class gazing up at the battereddesk on the platform.

II.

My reabsorption into normal life was a painful and difficult process. The loss of over fiveyears creates more complications than can be imagined, and in my case there were countless mattersto be adjusted. What I heard of my actions since 1908 astonished and disturbed me, but I triedto view the matter as philosophically as I could. At last regaining custody of my second sonWingate, I settled down with him in the Crane Street house and endeavoured to resume teaching—myold professorship having been kindly offered me by the college.
I began work with the February, 1914, term, and kept at it just a year. Bythat time I realised how badly my experience had shaken me. Though perfectly sane—I hoped—andwith no flaw in my original personality, I had not the nervous energy of the old days. Vaguedreams and queer ideas continually haunted me, and when the outbreak of the world war turnedmy mind to history I found myself thinking of periods and events in the oddest possible fashion.My conception of time—my ability to distinguish between consecutiveness and simultaneousness—seemedsubtly disordered; so that I formed chimerical notions about living in one age and casting one’smind all over eternity for knowledge of past and future ages.
The war gave me strange impressions of remembering some of its far-offconsequences—as if I knew how it was coming out and could look back uponit in the light of future information. All such quasi-memories were attended with much pain,and with a feeling that some artificial psychological barrier was set against them. When I diffidentlyhinted to others about my impressions I met with varied responses. Some persons looked uncomfortablyat me, but men in the mathematics department spoke of new developments in those theories ofrelativity—then discussed only in learned circles—which were later to become sofamous. Dr. Albert Einstein, they said, was rapidly reducing time to the status of amere dimension.
But the dreams and disturbed feelings gained on me, so that I had to drop myregular work in 1915. Certain of the impressions were taking an annoying shape—givingme the persistent notion that my amnesia had formed some unholy sort of exchange; thatthe secondary personality had indeed been an intruding force from unknown regions, and thatmy own personality had suffered displacement. Thus I was driven to vague and frightful speculationsconcerning the whereabouts of my true self during the years that another had held my body. Thecurious knowledge and strange conduct of my body’s late tenant troubled me more and moreas I learned further details from persons, papers, and magazines. Queernesses that had baffledothers seemed to harmonise terribly with some background of black knowledge which festered inthe chasms of my subconscious. I began to search feverishly for every scrap of information bearingon the studies and travels of that other one during the dark years.
Not all of my troubles were as semi-abstract as this. There were the dreams—andthese seemed to grow in vividness and concreteness. Knowing how most would regard them, I seldommentioned them to anyone but my son or certain trusted psychologists, but eventually I commenceda scientific study of other cases in order to see how typical or non-typical such visions mightbe among amnesia victims. My results, aided by psychologists, historians, anthropologists, andmental specialists of wide experience, and by a study that included all records of split personalitiesfrom the days of daemoniac-possession legends to the medically realistic present, at first botheredme more than they consoled me.
I soon found that my dreams had indeed no counterpart in the overwhelming bulkof true amnesia cases. There remained, however, a tiny residue of accounts which for years baffledand shocked me with their parallelism to my own experience. Some of them were bits of ancientfolklore; others were case-histories in the annals of medicine; one or two were anecdotes obscurelyburied in standard histories. It thus appeared that, while my special kind of affliction wasprodigiously rare, instances of it had occurred at long intervals ever since the beginning ofman’s annals. Some centuries might contain one, two, or three cases; others none—orat least none whose record survived.
The essence was always the same—a person of keen thoughtfulness seizedwith a strange secondary life and leading for a greater or lesser period an utterly alien existencetypified at first by vocal and bodily awkwardness, and later by a wholesale acquisition of scientific,historic, artistic, and anthropological knowledge; an acquisition carried on with feverish zestand with a wholly abnormal absorptive power. Then a sudden return of the rightful consciousness,intermittently plagued ever after with vague unplaceable dreams suggesting fragments of somehideous memory elaborately blotted out. And the close resemblance of those nightmares to myown—even in some of the smallest particulars—left no doubt in my mind of their significantlytypical nature. One or two of the cases had an added ring of faint, blasphemous familiarity,as if I had heard of them before through some cosmic channel too morbid and frightful to contemplate.In three instances there was specific mention of such an unknown machine as had been in my housebefore the second change.
Another thing that cloudily worried me during my investigation was the somewhatgreater frequency of cases where a brief, elusive glimpse of the typical nightmares was affordedto persons not visited with well-defined amnesia. These persons were largely of mediocre mindor less—some so primitive that they could scarcely be thought of as vehicles for abnormalscholarship and preternatural mental acquisitions. For a second they would be fired with alienforce—then a backward lapse and a thin, swift-fading memory of un-human horrors.
There had been at least three such cases during the past half century—oneonly fifteen years before. Had something been groping blindly through time from someunsuspected abyss in Nature? Were these faint cases monstrous, sinister experiments ofa kind and authorship utterly beyond sane belief? Such were a few of the formless speculationsof my weaker hours—fancies abetted by myths which my studies uncovered. For I could notdoubt but that certain persistent legends of immemorial antiquity, apparently unknown to thevictims and physicians connected with recent amnesia cases, formed a striking and awesome elaborationof memory lapses such as mine.
Of the nature of the dreams and impressions which were growing so clamorousI still almost fear to speak. They seemed to savour of madness, and at times I believed I wasindeed going mad. Was there a special type of delusion afflicting those who had suffered lapsesof memory? Conceivably, the efforts of the subconscious mind to fill up a perplexing blank withpseudo-memories might give rise to strange imaginative vagaries. This, indeed (though an alternativefolklore theory finally seemed to me more plausible), was the belief of many of the alienistswho helped me in my search for parallel cases, and who shared my puzzlement at the exact resemblancessometimes discovered. They did not call the condition true insanity, but classed it rather amongneurotic disorders. My course in trying to track it down and analyse it, instead of vainly seekingto dismiss or forget it, they heartily endorsed as correct according to the best psychologicalprinciples. I especially valued the advice of such physicians as had studied me during my possessionby the other personality.
My first disturbances were not visual at all, but concerned the more abstractmatters which I have mentioned. There was, too, a feeling of profound and inexplicable horrorconcerning myself. I developed a queer fear of seeing my own form, as if my eyes wouldfind it something utterly alien and inconceivably abhorrent. When I did glance down and beholdthe familiar human shape in quiet grey or blue clothing I always felt a curious relief, thoughin order to gain this relief I had to conquer an infinite dread. I shunned mirrors as much aspossible, and was always shaved at the barber’s.
It was a long time before I correlated any of these disjointed feelings withthe fleeting visual impressions which began to develop. The first such correlation had to dowith the odd sensation of an external, artificial restraint on my memory. I felt that the snatchesof sight I experienced had a profound and terrible meaning, and a frightful connexion with myself,but that some purposeful influence held me from grasping that meaning and that connexion. Thencame that queerness about the element of time, and with it desperate efforts to placethe fragmentary dream-glimpses in the chronological and spatial pattern.
The glimpses themselves were at first merely strange rather than horrible.I would seem to be in an enormous vaulted chamber whose lofty stone groinings were well-nighlost in the shadows overhead. In whatever time or place the scene might be, the principle ofthe arch was known as fully and used as extensively as by the Romans. There were colossal roundwindows and high arched doors, and pedestals or tables each as tall as the height of an ordinaryroom. Vast shelves of dark wood lined the walls, holding what seemed to be volumes of immensesize with strange hieroglyphs on their backs. The exposed stonework held curious carvings, alwaysin curvilinear mathematical designs, and there were chiselled inscriptions in the same charactersthat the huge books bore. The dark granite masonry was of a monstrous megalithic type, withlines of convex-topped blocks fitting the concave-bottomed courses which rested upon them. Therewere no chairs, but the tops of the vast pedestals were littered with books, papers, and whatseemed to be writing materials—oddly figured jars of a purplish metal, and rods with stainedtips. Tall as the pedestals were, I seemed at times able to view them from above. On some ofthem were great globes of luminous crystal serving as lamps, and inexplicable machines formedof vitreous tubes and metal rods. The windows were glazed, and latticed with stout-looking bars.Though I dared not approach and peer out them, I could see from where I was the waving topsof singular fern-like growths. The floor was of massive octagonal flagstones, while rugs andhangings were entirely lacking.
Later I had visions of sweeping through Cyclopean corridors of stone, and upand down gigantic inclined planes of the same monstrous masonry. There were no stairs anywhere,nor was any passageway less than thirty feet wide. Some of the structures through which I floatedmust have towered into the sky for thousands of feet. There were multiple levels of black vaultsbelow, and never-opened trap-doors, sealed down with metal bands and holding dim suggestionsof some special peril. I seemed to be a prisoner, and horror hung broodingly over everythingI saw. I felt that the mocking curvilinear hieroglyphs on the walls would blast my soul withtheir message were I not guarded by a merciful ignorance.
Still later my dreams included vistas from the great round windows, and fromthe titanic flat roof, with its curious gardens, wide barren area, and high, scalloped parapetof stone, to which the topmost of the inclined planes led. There were almost endless leaguesof giant buildings, each in its garden, and ranged along paved roads fully two hundred feetwide. They differed greatly in aspect, but few were less than five hundred feet square or athousand feet high. Many seemed so limitless that they must have had a frontage of several thousandfeet, while some shot up to mountainous altitudes in the grey, steamy heavens. They seemed tobe mainly of stone or concrete, and most of them embodied the oddly curvilinear type of masonrynoticeable in the building that held me. Roofs were flat and garden-covered, and tended to havescalloped parapets. Sometimes there were terraces and higher levels, and wide cleared spacesamidst the gardens. The great roads held hints of motion, but in the earlier visions I couldnot resolve this impression into details.
In certain places I beheld enormous dark cylindrical towers which climbed farabove any of the other structures. These appeared to be of a totally unique nature, and shewedsigns of prodigious age and dilapidation. They were built of a bizarre type of square-cut basaltmasonry, and tapered slightly toward their rounded tops. Nowhere in any of them could the leasttraces of windows or other apertures save huge doors be found. I noticed also some lower buildings—allcrumbling with the weathering of aeons—which resembled these dark cylindrical towers inbasic architecture. Around all these aberrant piles of square-cut masonry there hovered an inexplicableaura of menace and concentrated fear, like that bred by the sealed trap-doors.
The omnipresent gardens were almost terrifying in their strangeness, with bizarreand unfamiliar forms of vegetation nodding over broad paths lined with curiously carven monoliths.Abnormally vast fern-like growths predominated; some green, and some of a ghastly, fungoid pallor.Among them rose great spectral things resembling calamites, whose bamboo-like trunks toweredto fabulous heights. Then there were tufted forms like fabulous cycads, and grotesque dark-greenshrubs and trees of coniferous aspect. Flowers were small, colourless, and unrecognisable, bloomingin geometrical beds and at large among the greenery. In a few of the terrace and roof-top gardenswere larger and more vivid blossoms of almost offensive contours and seeming to suggest artificialbreeding. Fungi of inconceivable size, outlines, and colours speckled the scene in patternsbespeaking some unknown but well-established horticultural tradition. In the larger gardenson the ground there seemed to be some attempt to preserve the irregularities of Nature, buton the roofs there was more selectiveness, and more evidences of the topiary art.
The skies were almost always moist and cloudy, and sometimes I would seem towitness tremendous rains. Once in a while, though, there would be glimpses of the sun—whichlooked abnormally large—and of the moon, whose markings held a touch of difference fromthe normal that I could never quite fathom. When—very rarely—the night sky was clearto any extent, I beheld constellations which were nearly beyond recognition. Known outlineswere sometimes approximated, but seldom duplicated; and from the position of the few groupsI could recognise, I felt I must be in the earth’s southern hemisphere, near the Tropicof Capricorn. The far horizon was always steamy and indistinct, but I could see that great junglesof unknown tree-ferns, calamites, lepidodendra, and sigillaria lay outside the city, their fantasticfrondage waving mockingly in the shifting vapours. Now and then there would be suggestions ofmotion in the sky, but these my early visions never resolved.
By the autumn of 1914 I began to have infrequent dreams of strange floatingsover the city and through the regions around it. I saw interminable roads through forestsof fearsome growths with mottled, fluted, and banded trunks, and past other cities as strangeas the one which persistently haunted me. I saw monstrous constructions of black or iridescentstone in glades and clearings where perpetual twilight reigned, and traversed long causewaysover swamps so dark that I could tell but little of their moist, towering vegetation. Once Isaw an area of countless miles strown with age-blasted basaltic ruins whose architecture hadbeen like that of the few windowless, round-topped towers in the haunting city. And once I sawthe sea—a boundless steamy expanse beyond the colossal stone piers of an enormous townof domes and arches. Great shapeless suggestions of shadow moved over it, and here and thereits surface was vexed with anomalous spoutings.

III.

As I have said, it was not immediately that these wild visions began to hold their terrifyingquality. Certainly, many persons have dreamed intrinsically stranger things—things compoundedof unrelated scraps of daily life, pictures, and reading, and arranged in fantastically novelforms by the unchecked caprices of sleep. For some time I accepted the visions as natural, eventhough I had never before been an extravagant dreamer. Many of the vague anomalies, I argued,must have come from trivial sources too numerous to track down; while others seemed to reflecta common text-book knowledge of the plants and other conditions of the primitive world of ahundred and fifty million years ago—the world of the Permian or Triassic age. In the courseof some months, however, the element of terror did figure with accumulating force. This waswhen the dreams began so unfailingly to have the aspect of memories, and when my mindbegan to link them with my growing abstract disturbances—the feeling of mnemonic restraint,the curious impressions regarding time, the sense of a loathsome exchange with my secondarypersonality of 1908–13, and, considerably later, the inexplicable loathing of my own person.
As certain definite details began to enter the dreams, their horror increaseda thousandfold—until by October, 1915, I felt I must do something. It was then that Ibegan an intensive study of other cases of amnesia and visions, feeling that I might therebyobjectivise my trouble and shake clear of its emotional grip. However, as before mentioned,the result was at first almost exactly opposite. It disturbed me vastly to find that my dreamshad been so closely duplicated; especially since some of the accounts were too early to admitof any geological knowledge—and therefore of any idea of primitive landscapes—onthe subjects’ part. What is more, many of these accounts supplied very horrible detailsand explanations in connexion with the visions of great buildings and jungle gardens—andother things. The actual sights and vague impressions were bad enough, but what was hinted orasserted by some of the other dreamers savoured of madness and blasphemy. Worst of all, my ownpseudo-memory was aroused to wilder dreams and hints of coming revelations. And yet most doctorsdeemed my course, on the whole, an advisable one.
I studied psychology systematically, and under the prevailing stimulus my sonWingate did the same—his studies leading eventually to his present professorship. In 1917and 1918 I took special courses at Miskatonic. Meanwhile my examination of medical, historical,and anthropological records became indefatigable; involving travels to distant libraries, andfinally including even a reading of the hideous books of forbidden elder lore in which my secondarypersonality had been so disturbingly interested. Some of the latter were the actual copies Ihad consulted in my altered state, and I was greatly disturbed by certain marginal notationsand ostensible corrections of the hideous text in a script and idiom which somehow seemedoddly un-human.
These markings were mostly in the respective languages of the various books,all of which the writer seemed to know with equal though obviously academic facility. One noteappended to von Junzt’s Unaussprechlichen Kulten, however, was alarmingly otherwise.It consisted of certain curvilinear hieroglyphs in the same ink as that of the German corrections,but following no recognised human pattern. And these hieroglyphs were closely and unmistakablyakin to the characters constantly met with in my dreams—characters whose meaning I wouldsometimes momentarily fancy I knew or was just on the brink of recalling. To complete my blackconfusion, my librarians assured me that, in view of previous examinations and records of consultationof the volumes in question, all of these notations must have been made by myself in my secondarystate. This despite the fact that I was and still am ignorant of three of the languages involved.
Piecing together the scattered records, ancient and modern, anthropologicaland medical, I found a fairly consistent mixture of myth and hallucination whose scope and wildnessleft me utterly dazed. Only one thing consoled me—the fact that the myths were of suchearly existence. What lost knowledge could have brought pictures of the Palaeozoic or Mesozoiclandscape into these primitive fables, I could not even guess, but the pictures had been there.Thus, a basis existed for the formation of a fixed type of delusion. Cases of amnesia no doubtcreated the general myth-pattern—but afterward the fanciful accretions of the myths musthave reacted on amnesia sufferers and coloured their pseudo-memories. I myself had read andheard all the early tales during my memory lapse—my quest had amply proved that. Was itnot natural, then, for my subsequent dreams and emotional impressions to become coloured andmoulded by what my memory subtly held over from my secondary state? A few of the myths had significantconnexions with other cloudy legends of the pre-human world, especially those Hindoo tales involvingstupefying gulfs of time and forming part of the lore of modern theosophists.
Primal myth and modern delusion joined in their assumption that mankind isonly one—perhaps the least—of the highly evolved and dominant races of this planet’slong and largely unknown career. Things of inconceivable shape, they implied, had reared towersto the sky and delved into every secret of Nature before the first amphibian forbear of manhad crawled out of the hot sea three hundred million years ago. Some had come down from thestars; a few were as old as the cosmos itself; others had arisen swiftly from terrene germsas far behind the first germs of our life-cycle as those germs are behind ourselves. Spans ofthousands of millions of years, and linkages with other galaxies and universes, were freelyspoken of. Indeed, there was no such thing as time in its humanly accepted sense.
But most of the tales and impressions concerned a relatively late race, ofa queer and intricate shape resembling no life-form known to science, which had lived till onlyfifty million years before the advent of man. This, they indicated, was the greatest race ofall; because it alone had conquered the secret of time. It had learned all things that everwere known or ever would be known on the earth, through the power of its keener mindsto project themselves into the past and future, even through gulfs of millions of years, andstudy the lore of every age. From the accomplishments of this race arose all legends of prophets,including those in human mythology.
In its vast libraries were volumes of texts and pictures holding the wholeof earth’s annals—histories and descriptions of every species that had ever beenor that ever would be, with full records of their arts, their achievements, their languages,and their psychologies. With this aeon-embracing knowledge, the Great Race chose from everyera and life-form such thoughts, arts, and processes as might suit its own nature and situation.Knowledge of the past, secured through a kind of mind-casting outside the recognised senses,was harder to glean than knowledge of the future.
In the latter case the course was easier and more material. With suitable mechanicalaid a mind would project itself forward in time, feeling its dim, extra-sensory way till itapproached the desired period. Then, after preliminary trials, it would seize on the best discoverablerepresentative of the highest of that period’s life-forms; entering the organism’sbrain and setting up therein its own vibrations while the displaced mind would strike back tothe period of the displacer, remaining in the latter’s body till a reverse process wasset up. The projected mind, in the body of the organism of the future, would then pose as amember of the race whose outward form it wore; learning as quickly as possible all that couldbe learned of the chosen age and its massed information and techniques.
Meanwhile the displaced mind, thrown back to the displacer’s age andbody, would be carefully guarded. It would be kept from harming the body it occupied, and wouldbe drained of all its knowledge by trained questioners. Often it could be questioned in itsown language, when previous quests into the future had brought back records of that language.If the mind came from a body whose language the Great Race could not physically reproduce, clevermachines would be made, on which the alien speech could be played as on a musical instrument.The Great Race’s members were immense rugose cones ten feet high, and with head and otherorgans attached to foot-thick, distensible limbs spreading from the apexes. They spoke by theclicking or scraping of huge paws or claws attached to the end of two of their four limbs, andwalked by the expansion and contraction of a viscous layer attached to their vast ten-foot bases.
When the captive mind’s amazement and resentment had worn off, and when(assuming that it came from a body vastly different from the Great Race’s) it had lostits horror at its unfamiliar temporary form, it was permitted to study its new environment andexperience a wonder and wisdom approximating that of its displacer. With suitable precautions,and in exchange for suitable services, it was allowed to rove all over the habitable world intitan airships or on the huge boat-like atomic-engined vehicles which traversed the great roads,and to delve freely into the libraries containing the records of the planet’s past andfuture. This reconciled many captive minds to their lot; since none were other than keen, andto such minds the unveiling of hidden mysteries of earth—closed chapters of inconceivablepasts and dizzying vortices of future time which include the years ahead of their own naturalages—forms always, despite the abysmal horrors often unveiled, the supreme experienceof life.
Now and then certain captives were permitted to meet other captive minds seizedfrom the future—to exchange thoughts with consciousnesses living a hundred or a thousandor a million years before or after their own ages. And all were urged to write copiously intheir own languages of themselves and their respective periods; such documents to be filed inthe great central archives.
It may be added that there was one sad special type of captive whose privilegeswere far greater than those of the majority. These were the dying permanent exiles, whosebodies in the future had been seized by keen-minded members of the Great Race who, faced withdeath, sought to escape mental extinction. Such melancholy exiles were not as common as mightbe expected, since the longevity of the Great Race lessened its love of life—especiallyamong those superior minds capable of projection. From cases of the permanent projection ofelder minds arose many of those lasting changes of personality noticed in later history—includingmankind’s.
As for the ordinary cases of exploration—when the displacing mind hadlearned what it wished in the future, it would build an apparatus like that which had startedits flight and reverse the process of projection. Once more it would be in its own body in itsown age, while the lately captive mind would return to that body of the future to which it properlybelonged. Only when one or the other of the bodies had died during the exchange was this restorationimpossible. In such cases, of course, the exploring mind had—like those of the death-escapers—tolive out an alien-bodied life in the future; or else the captive mind—like the dying permanentexiles—had to end its days in the form and past age of the Great Race.
This fate was least horrible when the captive mind was also of the Great Race—anot infrequent occurrence, since in all its periods that race was intensely concerned with itsown future. The number of dying permanent exiles of the Great Race was very slight—largelybecause of the tremendous penalties attached to displacements of future Great Race minds bythe moribund. Through projection, arrangements were made to inflict these penalties on the offendingminds in their new future bodies—and sometimes forced re-exchanges were effected. Complexcases of the displacement of exploring or already captive minds by minds in various regionsof the past had been known and carefully rectified. In every age since the discovery of mind-projection,a minute but well-recognised element of the population consisted of Great Race minds from pastages, sojourning for a longer or shorter while.
When a captive mind of alien origin was returned to its own body in the future,it was purged by an intricate mechanical hypnosis of all it had learned in the Great Race’sage—this because of certain troublesome consequences inherent in the general carryingforward of knowledge in large quantities. The few existing instances of clear transmission hadcaused, and would cause at known future times, great disasters. And it was largely in consequenceof two cases of the kind (said the old myths) that mankind had learned what it had concerningthe Great Race. Of all things surviving physically and directly from that aeon-distantworld, there remained only certain ruins of great stones in far places and under the sea, andparts of the text of the frightful Pnakotic Manuscripts.
Thus the returning mind reached its own age with only the faintest and mostfragmentary visions of what it had undergone since its seizure. All memories that could be eradicatedwere eradicated, so that in most cases only a dream-shadowed blank stretched back to the timeof the first exchange. Some minds recalled more than others, and the chance joining of memorieshad at rare times brought hints of the forbidden past to future ages. There probably never wasa time when groups or cults did not secretly cherish certain of these hints. In the Necronomiconthe presence of such a cult among human beings was suggested—a cult that sometimes gaveaid to minds voyaging down the aeons from the days of the Great Race.
And meanwhile the Great Race itself waxed well-nigh omniscient, and turnedto the task of setting up exchanges with the minds of other planets, and of exploring theirpasts and futures. It sought likewise to fathom the past years and origin of that black, aeon-deadorb in far space whence its own mental heritage had come—for the mind of the Great Racewas older than its bodily form. The beings of a dying elder world, wise with the ultimate secrets,had looked ahead for a new world and species wherein they might have long life; and had senttheir minds en masse into that future race best adapted to house them—the cone-shapedthings that peopled our earth a billion years ago. Thus the Great Race came to be, while themyriad minds sent backward were left to die in the horror of strange shapes. Later the racewould again face death, yet would live through another forward migration of its best minds intothe bodies of others who had a longer physical span ahead of them.
Such was the background of intertwined legend and hallucination. When, around1920, I had my researches in coherent shape, I felt a slight lessening of the tension whichtheir earlier stages had increased. After all, and in spite of the fancies prompted by blindemotions, were not most of my phenomena readily explainable? Any chance might have turned mymind to dark studies during the amnesia—and then I read the forbidden legends and metthe members of ancient and ill-regarded cults. That, plainly, supplied the material for thedreams and disturbed feelings which came after the return of memory. As for the marginal notesin dream-hieroglyphs and languages unknown to me, but laid at my door by librarians—Imight easily have picked up a smattering of the tongues during my secondary state, while thehieroglyphs were doubtless coined by my fancy from descriptions in old legends, and afterwardwoven into my dreams. I tried to verify certain points through conversation with known cult-leaders,but never succeeded in establishing the right connexions.
At times the parallelism of so many cases in so many distant ages continuedto worry me as it had at first, but on the other hand I reflected that the excitant folklorewas undoubtedly more universal in the past than in the present. Probably all the other victimswhose cases were like mine had had a long and familiar knowledge of the tales I had learnedonly when in my secondary state. When these victims had lost their memory, they had associatedthemselves with the creatures of their household myths—the fabulous invaders supposedto displace men’s minds—and had thus embarked upon quests for knowledge which theythought they could take back to a fancied, non-human past. Then when their memory returned,they reversed the associative process and thought of themselves as the former captive mindsinstead of as the displacers. Hence the dreams and pseudo-memories following the conventionalmyth-pattern.
Despite the seeming cumbrousness of these explanations, they came finally tosupersede all others in my mind—largely because of the greater weakness of any rival theory.And a substantial number of eminent psychologists and anthropologists gradually agreed withme. The more I reflected, the more convincing did my reasoning seem; till in the end I had areally effective bulwark against the visions and impressions which still assailed me. SupposeI did see strange things at night? These were only what I had heard and read of. Suppose I didhave odd loathings and perspectives and pseudo-memories? These, too, were only echoes of mythsabsorbed in my secondary state. Nothing that I might dream, nothing that I might feel, couldbe of any actual significance.
Fortified by this philosophy, I greatly improved in nervous equilibrium, eventhough the visions (rather than the abstract impressions) steadily became more frequent andmore disturbingly detailed. In 1922 I felt able to undertake regular work again, and put mynewly gained knowledge to practical use by accepting an instructorship in psychology at theuniversity. My old chair of political economy had long been adequately filled—besideswhich, methods of teaching economics had changed greatly since my heyday. My son was at thistime just entering on the post-graduate studies leading to his present professorship, and weworked together a great deal.

IV.

I continued, however, to keep a careful record of the outré dreams which crowded uponme so thickly and vividly. Such a record, I argued, was of genuine value as a psychologicaldocument. The glimpses still seemed damnably like memories, though I fought off thisimpression with a goodly measure of success. In writing, I treated the phantasmata as thingsseen; but at all other times I brushed them aside like any gossamer illusions of the night.I had never mentioned such matters in common conversation; though reports of them, filteringout as such things will, had aroused sundry rumours regarding my mental health. It is amusingto reflect that these rumours were confined wholly to laymen, without a single champion amongphysicians or psychologists.
Of my visions after 1914 I will here mention only a few, since fuller accountsand records are at the disposal of the serious student. It is evident that with time the curiousinhibitions somewhat waned, for the scope of my visions vastly increased. They have never, though,become other than disjointed fragments seemingly without clear motivation. Within the dreamsI seemed gradually to acquire a greater and greater freedom of wandering. I floated throughmany strange buildings of stone, going from one to the other along mammoth underground passageswhich seemed to form the common avenues of transit. Sometimes I encountered those gigantic sealedtrap-doors in the lowest level, around which such an aura of fear and forbiddenness clung. Isaw tremendous tessellated pools, and rooms of curious and inexplicable utensils of myriad sorts.Then there were colossal caverns of intricate machinery whose outlines and purpose were whollystrange to me, and whose sound manifested itself only after many years of dreaming. Imay here remark that sight and sound are the only senses I have ever exercised in the visionaryworld.
The real horror began in May, 1915, when I first saw the living things.This was before my studies had taught me what, in view of the myths and case histories, to expect.As mental barriers wore down, I beheld great masses of thin vapour in various parts of the buildingand in the streets below. These steadily grew more solid and distinct, till at last I couldtrace their monstrous outlines with uncomfortable ease. They seemed to be enormous iridescentcones, about ten feet high and ten feet wide at the base, and made up of some ridgy, scaly,semi-elastic matter. From their apexes projected four flexible, cylindrical members, each afoot thick, and of a ridgy substance like that of the cones themselves. These members were sometimescontracted almost to nothing, and sometimes extended to any distance up to about ten feet. Terminatingtwo of them were enormous claws or nippers. At the end of a third were four red, trumpet-likeappendages. The fourth terminated in an irregular yellowish globe some two feet in diameterand having three great dark eyes ranged along its central circumference. Surmounting this headwere four slender grey stalks bearing flower-like appendages, whilst from its nether side dangledeight greenish antennae or tentacles. The great base of the central cone was fringed with arubbery, grey substance which moved the whole entity through expansion and contraction.
Their actions, though harmless, horrified me even more than their appearance—forit is not wholesome to watch monstrous objects doing what one has known only human beings todo. These objects moved intelligently around the great rooms, getting books from the shelvesand taking them to the great tables, or vice versa, and sometimes writing diligently with apenlike rod gripped in the greenish head-tentacles. The huge nippers were used in carryingbooks and in conversation—speech consisting of a kind of clicking and scraping. The objectshad no clothing, but wore satchels or knapsacks suspended from the top of the conical trunk.They commonly carried their head and its supporting member at the level of the cone top, althoughit was frequently raised or lowered. The other three great members tended to rest downward onthe sides of the cone, contracted to about five feet each, when not in use. From their rateof reading, writing, and operating their machines (those on the tables seemed somehow connectedwith thought) I concluded that their intelligence was enormously greater than man’s.
Afterward I saw them everywhere; swarming in all the great chambers and corridors,tending monstrous machines in vaulted crypts, and racing along the vast roads in gigantic boat-shapedcars. I ceased to be afraid of them, for they seemed to form supremely natural parts of theirenvironment. Individual differences amongst them began to be manifest, and a few appeared tobe under some kind of restraint. These latter, though shewing no physical variation, had a diversityof gestures and habits which marked them off not only from the majority, but very largely fromone another. They wrote a great deal in what seemed to my cloudy vision a vast variety of characters—neverthe typical curvilinear hieroglyphs of the majority. A few, I fancied, used our own familiaralphabet. Most of them worked much more slowly than the general mass of the entities.
All this time my own part in the dreams seemed to be that of a disembodiedconsciousness with a range of vision wider than the normal; floating freely about, yet confinedto the ordinary avenues and speeds of travel. Not until August, 1915, did any suggestions ofbodily existence begin to harass me. I say harass, because the first phase was a purelyabstract though infinitely terrible association of my previously noted body-loathing with thescenes of my visions. For a while my chief concern during dreams was to avoid looking down atmyself, and I recall how grateful I was for the total absence of large mirrors in the strangerooms. I was mightily troubled by the fact that I always saw the great tables—whose heightcould not be under ten feet—from a level not below that of their surfaces.
And then the morbid temptation to look down at myself became greater and greater,till one night I could not resist it. At first my downward glance revealed nothing whatever.A moment later I perceived that this was because my head lay at the end of a flexible neck ofenormous length. Retracting this neck and gazing down very sharply, I saw the scaly, rugose,iridescent bulk of a vast cone ten feet tall and ten feet wide at the base. That was when Iwaked half of Arkham with my screaming as I plunged madly up from the abyss of sleep.
Only after weeks of hideous repetition did I grow half-reconciled to thesevisions of myself in monstrous form. In the dreams I now moved bodily among the other unknownentities, reading terrible books from the endless shelves and writing for hours at the greattables with a stylus managed by the green tentacles that hung down from my head. Snatches ofwhat I read and wrote would linger in my memory. There were horrible annals of other worldsand other universes, and of stirrings of formless life outside of all universes. There wererecords of strange orders of beings which had peopled the world in forgotten pasts, and frightfulchronicles of grotesque-bodied intelligences which would people it millions of years after thedeath of the last human being. And I learned of chapters in human history whose existence noscholar of today has ever suspected. Most of these writings were in the language of the hieroglyphs;which I studied in a queer way with the aid of droning machines, and which was evidently anagglutinative speech with root systems utterly unlike any found in human languages. Other volumeswere in other unknown tongues learned in the same queer way. A very few were in languages Iknew. Extremely clever pictures, both inserted in the records and forming separate collections,aided me immensely. And all the time I seemed to be setting down a history of my own age inEnglish. On waking, I could recall only minute and meaningless scraps of the unknown tongueswhich my dream-self had mastered, though whole phrases of the history stayed with me.
I learned—even before my waking self had studied the parallel cases orthe old myths from which the dreams doubtless sprang—that the entities around me wereof the world’s greatest race, which had conquered time and had sent exploring minds intoevery age. I knew, too, that I had been snatched from my age while another used my bodyin that age, and that a few of the other strange forms housed similarly captured minds. I seemedto talk, in some odd language of claw-clickings, with exiled intellects from every corner ofthe solar system.
There was a mind from the planet we know as Venus, which would live incalculableepochs to come, and one from an outer moon of Jupiter six million years in the past. Of earthlyminds there were some from the winged, star-headed, half-vegetable race of palaeogean Antarctica;one from the reptile people of fabled Valusia; three from the furry pre-human Hyperborean worshippersof Tsathoggua; one from the wholly abominable Tcho-Tchos; two from the arachnid denizens ofearth’s last age; five from the hardy coleopterous species immediately following mankind,to which the Great Race was some day to transfer its keenest minds en masse in the face of horribleperil; and several from different branches of humanity.
I talked with the mind of Yiang-Li, a philosopher from the cruel empire ofTsan-Chan, which is to come in A.D. 5000; with that of a general of the great-headed brown peoplewho held South Africa in B.C. 50,000; with that of a twelfth-century Florentine monk named BartolomeoCorsi; with that of a king of Lomar who had ruled that terrible polar land 100,000 years beforethe squat, yellow Inutos came from the west to engulf it; with that of Nug-Soth, a magicianof the dark conquerors of A.D. 16,000; with that of a Roman named Titus Sempronius Blaesus,who had been a quaestor in Sulla’s time; with that of Khephnes, an Egyptian of the 14thDynasty who told me the hideous secret of Nyarlathotep; with that of a priest of Atlantis’middle kingdom; with that of a Suffolk gentleman of Cromwell’s day, James Woodville; withthat of a court astronomer of pre-Inca Peru; with that of the Australian physicist Nevil Kingston-Brown,who will die in A.D. 2518; with that of an archimage of vanished Yhe in the Pacific; with thatof Theodotides, a Graeco-Bactrian official of B.C. 200; with that of an aged Frenchman of LouisXIII’s time named Pierre-Louis Montmagny; with that of Crom-Ya, a Cimmerian chieftainof B.C. 15,000; and with so many others that my brain cannot hold the shocking secrets and dizzyingmarvels I learned from them.
I awaked each morning in a fever, sometimes frantically trying to verify ordiscredit such information as fell within the range of modern human knowledge. Traditional factstook on new and doubtful aspects, and I marvelled at the dream-fancy which could invent suchsurprising addenda to history and science. I shivered at the mysteries the past may conceal,and trembled at the menaces the future may bring forth. What was hinted in the speech of post-humanentities of the fate of mankind produced such an effect on me that I will not set it down here.After man there would be the mighty beetle civilisation, the bodies of whose members the creamof the Great Race would seize when the monstrous doom overtook the elder world. Later, as theearth’s span closed, the transferred minds would again migrate through time and space—toanother stopping-place in the bodies of the bulbous vegetable entities of Mercury. But therewould be races after them, clinging pathetically to the cold planet and burrowing to its horror-filledcore, before the utter end.
Meanwhile, in my dreams, I wrote endlessly in that history of my own age whichI was preparing—half voluntarily and half through promises of increased library and travelopportunities—for the Great Race’s central archives. The archives were in a colossalsubterranean structure near the city’s centre, which I came to know well through frequentlabours and consultations. Meant to last as long as the race, and to withstand the fiercestof earth’s convulsions, this titan repository surpassed all other buildings in the massive,mountain-like firmness of its construction.
The records, written or printed on great sheets of a curiously tenacious cellulosefabric, were bound into books that opened from the top, and were kept in individual cases ofa strange, extremely light rustless metal of greyish hue, decorated with mathematical designsand bearing the title in the Great Race’s curvilinear hieroglyphs. These cases were storedin tiers of rectangular vaults—like closed, locked shelves—wrought of the same rustlessmetal and fastened by knobs with intricate turnings. My own history was assigned a specificplace in the vaults of the lowest or vertebrate level—the section devoted to the cultureof mankind and of the furry and reptilian races immediately preceding it in terrestrial dominance.
But none of the dreams ever gave me a full picture of daily life. All werethe merest misty, disconnected fragments, and it is certain that these fragments were not unfoldedin their rightful sequence. I have, for example, a very imperfect idea of my own living arrangementsin the dream-world; though I seem to have possessed a great stone room of my own. My restrictionsas a prisoner gradually disappeared, so that some of the visions included vivid travels overthe mighty jungle roads, sojourns in strange cities, and explorations of some of the vast darkwindowless ruins from which the Great Race shrank in curious fear. There were also long sea-voyagesin enormous, many-decked boats of incredible swiftness, and trips over wild regions in closed,projectile-like airships lifted and moved by electrical repulsion. Beyond the wide, warm oceanwere other cities of the Great Race, and on one far continent I saw the crude villages of theblack-snouted, winged creatures who would evolve as a dominant stock after the Great Race hadsent its foremost minds into the future to escape the creeping horror. Flatness and exuberantgreen life were always the keynote of the scene. Hills were low and sparse, and usually displayedsigns of volcanic forces.
Of the animals I saw, I could write volumes. All were wild; for the Great Race’smechanised culture had long since done away with domestic beasts, while food was wholly vegetableor synthetic. Clumsy reptiles of great bulk floundered in steaming morasses, fluttered in theheavy air, or spouted in the seas and lakes; and among these I fancied I could vaguely recogniselesser, archaic prototypes of many forms—dinosaurs, pterodactyls, ichthyosaurs, labyrinthodonts,rhamphorhynci, plesiosaurs, and the like—made familiar through palaeontology. Of birdsor mammals there were none that I could discern.
The ground and swamps were constantly alive with snakes, lizards, and crocodiles,while insects buzzed incessantly amidst the lush vegetation. And far out at sea unspied andunknown monsters spouted mountainous columns of foam into the vaporous sky. Once I was takenunder the ocean in a gigantic submarine vessel with searchlights, and glimpsed some living horrorsof awesome magnitude. I saw also the ruins of incredible sunken cities, and the wealth of crinoid,brachiopod, coral, and ichthyic life which everywhere abounded.
Of the physiology, psychology, folkways, and detailed history of the GreatRace my visions preserved but little information, and many of the scattered points I here setdown were gleaned from my study of old legends and other cases rather than from my own dreaming.For in time, of course, my reading and research caught up with and passed the dreams in manyphases; so that certain dream-fragments were explained in advance, and formed verificationsof what I had learned. This consolingly established my belief that similar reading and research,accomplished by my secondary self, had formed the source of the whole terrible fabric of pseudo-memories.
The period of my dreams, apparently, was one somewhat less than 150,000,000years ago, when the Palaeozoic age was giving place to the Mesozoic. The bodies occupied bythe Great Race represented no surviving—or even scientifically known—line of terrestrialevolution, but were of a peculiar, closely homogeneous, and highly specialised organic typeinclining as much to the vegetable as to the animal state. Cell-action was of an unique sortalmost precluding fatigue, and wholly eliminating the need of sleep. Nourishment, assimilatedthrough the red trumpet-like appendages on one of the great flexible limbs, was always semi-fluidand in many aspects wholly unlike the food of existing animals. The beings had but two of thesenses which we recognise—sight and hearing, the latter accomplished through the flower-likeappendages on the grey stalks above their heads—but of other and incomprehensible senses(not, however, well utilisable by alien captive minds inhabiting their bodies) they possessedmany. Their three eyes were so situated as to give them a range of vision wider than the normal.Their blood was a sort of deep-greenish ichor of great thickness. They had no sex, but reproducedthrough seeds or spores which clustered on their bases and could be developed only under water.Great, shallow tanks were used for the growth of their young—which were, however, rearedonly in small numbers on account of the longevity of individuals; four or five thousand yearsbeing the common life span.
Markedly defective individuals were quietly disposed of as soon as their defectswere noticed. Disease and the approach of death were, in the absence of a sense of touch orof physical pain, recognised by purely visual symptoms. The dead were incinerated with dignifiedceremonies. Once in a while, as before mentioned, a keen mind would escape death by forwardprojection in time; but such cases were not numerous. When one did occur, the exiled mind fromthe future was treated with the utmost kindness till the dissolution of its unfamiliar tenement.
The Great Race seemed to form a single loosely knit nation or league, withmajor institutions in common, though there were four definite divisions. The political and economicsystem of each unit was a sort of fascistic socialism, with major resources rationally distributed,and power delegated to a small governing board elected by the votes of all able to pass certaineducational and psychological tests. Family organisation was not overstressed, though ties amongpersons of common descent were recognised, and the young were generally reared by their parents.
Resemblances to human attitudes and institutions were, of course, most markedin those fields where on the one hand highly abstract elements were concerned, or where on theother hand there was a dominance of the basic, unspecialised urges common to all organic life.A few added likenesses came through conscious adoption as the Great Race probed the future andcopied what it liked. Industry, highly mechanised, demanded but little time from each citizen;and the abundant leisure was filled with intellectual and aesthetic activities of various sorts.The sciences were carried to an unbelievable height of development, and art was a vital partof life, though at the period of my dreams it had passed its crest and meridian. Technologywas enormously stimulated through the constant struggle to survive, and to keep in existencethe physical fabric of great cities, imposed by the prodigious geologic upheavals of those primaldays.
Crime was surprisingly scanty, and was dealt with through highly efficientpolicing. Punishments ranged from privilege-deprivation and imprisonment to death or major emotion-wrenching,and were never administered without a careful study of the criminal’s motivations. Warfare,largely civil for the last few millennia though sometimes waged against reptilian and octopodicinvaders, or against the winged, star-headed Old Ones who centred in the Antarctic, was infrequentthough infinitely devastating. An enormous army, using camera-like weapons which produced tremendouselectrical effects, was kept on hand for purposes seldom mentioned, but obviously connectedwith the ceaseless fear of the dark, windowless elder ruins and of the great sealed trap-doorsin the lowest subterrene levels.
This fear of the basalt ruins and trap-doors was largely a matter of unspokensuggestion—or, at most, of furtive quasi-whispers. Everything specific which bore on itwas significantly absent from such books as were on the common shelves. It was the one subjectlying altogether under a taboo among the Great Race, and seemed to be connected alike with horriblebygone struggles, and with that future peril which would some day force the race to send itskeener minds ahead en masse in time. Imperfect and fragmentary as were the other things presentedby dreams and legends, this matter was still more bafflingly shrouded. The vague old myths avoidedit—or perhaps all allusions had for some reason been excised. And in the dreams of myselfand others, the hints were peculiarly few. Members of the Great Race never intentionally referredto the matter, and what could be gleaned came only from some of the more sharply observant captiveminds.
According to these scraps of information, the basis of the fear was a horribleelder race of half-polypous, utterly alien entities which had come through space from immeasurablydistant universes and had dominated the earth and three other solar planets about six hundredmillion years ago. They were only partly material—as we understand matter—and theirtype of consciousness and media of perception differed wholly from those of terrestrial organisms.For example, their senses did not include that of sight; their mental world being a strange,non-visual pattern of impressions. They were, however, sufficiently material to use implementsof normal matter when in cosmic areas containing it; and they required housing—albeitof a peculiar kind. Though their senses could penetrate all material barriers, theirsubstance could not; and certain forms of electrical energy could wholly destroy them.They had the power of aërial motion despite the absence of wings or any other visible meansof levitation. Their minds were of such texture that no exchange with them could be effectedby the Great Race.
When these things had come to the earth they had built mighty basalt citiesof windowless towers, and had preyed horribly upon the beings they found. Thus it was when theminds of the Great Race sped across the void from that obscure trans-galactic world known inthe disturbing and debatable Eltdown Shards as Yith. The newcomers, with the instruments theycreated, had found it easy to subdue the predatory entities and drive them down to those cavernsof inner earth which they had already joined to their abodes and begun to inhabit. Then theyhad sealed the entrances and left them to their fate, afterward occupying most of their greatcities and preserving certain important buildings for reasons connected more with superstitionthan with indifference, boldness, or scientific and historical zeal.
But as the aeons passed, there came vague, evil signs that the Elder Thingswere growing strong and numerous in the inner world. There were sporadic irruptions of a particularlyhideous character in certain small and remote cities of the Great Race, and in some of the desertedelder cities which the Great Race had not peopled—places where the paths to the gulfsbelow had not been properly sealed or guarded. After that greater precautions were taken, andmany of the paths were closed for ever—though a few were left with sealed trap-doors forstrategic use in fighting the Elder Things if ever they broke forth in unexpected places; freshrifts caused by that selfsame geologic change which had choked some of the paths and had slowlylessened the number of outer-world structures and ruins surviving from the conquered entities.
The irruptions of the Elder Things must have been shocking beyond all description,since they had permanently coloured the psychology of the Great Race. Such was the fixed moodof horror that the very aspect of the creatures was left unmentioned—at no timewas I able to gain a clear hint of what they looked like. There were veiled suggestions of amonstrous plasticity, and of temporary lapses of visibility, while other fragmentarywhispers referred to their control and military use of great winds. Singular whistlingnoises, and colossal footprints made up of five circular toe-marks, seemed also to be associatedwith them.
It was evident that the coming doom so desperately feared by the Great Race—thedoom that was one day to send millions of keen minds across the chasm of time to strange bodiesin the safer future—had to do with a final successful irruption of the Elder Beings. Mentalprojections down the ages had clearly foretold such a horror, and the Great Race had resolvedthat none who could escape should face it. That the foray would be a matter of vengeance, ratherthan an attempt to reoccupy the outer world, they knew from the planet’s later history—fortheir projections shewed the coming and going of subsequent races untroubled by the monstrousentities. Perhaps these entities had come to prefer earth’s inner abysses to the variable,storm-ravaged surface, since light meant nothing to them. Perhaps, too, they were slowly weakeningwith the aeons. Indeed, it was known that they would be quite dead in the time of the post-humanbeetle race which the fleeing minds would tenant. Meanwhile the Great Race maintained its cautiousvigilance, with potent weapons ceaselessly ready despite the horrified banishing of the subjectfrom common speech and visible records. And always the shadow of nameless fear hung about thesealed trap-doors and the dark, windowless elder towers.

V.

That is the world of which my dreams brought me dim, scattered echoes every night. I cannothope to give any true idea of the horror and dread contained in such echoes, for it was upona wholly intangible quality—the sharp sense of pseudo-memory—that such feelingsmainly depended. As I have said, my studies gradually gave me a defence against these feelings,in the form of rational psychological explanations; and this saving influence was augmentedby the subtle touch of accustomedness which comes with the passage of time. Yet in spite ofeverything the vague, creeping terror would return momentarily now and then. It did not, however,engulf me as it had before; and after 1922 I lived a very normal life of work and recreation.
In the course of years I began to feel that my experience—together withthe kindred cases and the related folklore—ought to be definitely summarised and publishedfor the benefit of serious students; hence I prepared a series of articles briefly coveringthe whole ground and illustrated with crude sketches of some of the shapes, scenes, decorativemotifs, and hieroglyphs remembered from the dreams. These appeared at various times during 1928and 1929 in the Journal of the American Psychological Society, but did not attract muchattention. Meanwhile I continued to record my dreams with the minutest care, even though thegrowing stack of reports attained troublesomely vast proportions.
On July 10, 1934, there was forwarded to me by the Psychological Society theletter which opened the culminating and most horrible phase of the whole mad ordeal. It waspostmarked Pilbarra, Western Australia, and bore the signature of one whom I found, upon inquiry,to be a mining engineer of considerable prominence. Enclosed were some very curious snapshots.I will reproduce the text in its entirety, and no reader can fail to understand how tremendousan effect it and the photographs had upon me.
I was, for a time, almost stunned and incredulous; for although I had oftenthought that some basis of fact must underlie certain phases of the legends which had colouredmy dreams, I was none the less unprepared for anything like a tangible survival from a lostworld remote beyond all imagination. Most devastating of all were the photographs—forhere, in cold, incontrovertible realism, there stood out against a background of sand certainworn-down, water-ridged, storm-weathered blocks of stone whose slightly convex tops and slightlyconcave bottoms told their own story. And when I studied them with a magnifying glass I couldsee all too plainly, amidst the batterings and pittings, the traces of those vast curvilineardesigns and occasional hieroglyphs whose significance had become so hideous to me. But hereis the letter, which speaks for itself:
49,Dampier Str.,
Pilbarra, W. Australia,
18May, 1934.Prof. N. W. Peaslee,
c/o Am. Psychological Society,
30, E. 41st Str.,
N. Y. City, U.S.A.
My dear Sir:—
A recent conversation with Dr. E. M. Boyle of Perth, and some papers with yourarticles which he has just sent me, make it advisable for me to tell you about certain thingsI have seen in the Great Sandy Desert east of our gold field here. It would seem, in view ofthe peculiar legends about old cities with huge stonework and strange designs and hieroglyphswhich you describe, that I have come upon something very important.
The blackfellows have always been full of talk about “great stones withmarks on them”, and seem to have a terrible fear of such things. They connect them insome way with their common racial legends about Buddai, the gigantic old man who lies asleepfor ages underground with his head on his arm, and who will some day awake and eat up the world.There are some very old and half-forgotten tales of enormous underground huts of great stones,where passages lead down and down, and where horrible things have happened. The blackfellowsclaim that once some warriors, fleeing in battle, went down into one and never came back, butthat frightful winds began to blow from the place soon after they went down. However, thereusually isn’t much in what these natives say.
But what I have to tell is more than this. Two years ago, when I was prospectingabout 500 miles east in the desert, I came on a lot of queer pieces of dressed stone perhaps3 × 2 × 2 feet in size, and weathered and pitted to the very limit. At first I couldn’tfind any of the marks the blackfellows told about, but when I looked close enough I could makeout some deeply carved lines in spite of the weathering. They were peculiar curves, just likewhat the blacks had tried to describe. I imagine there must have been 30 or 40 blocks, somenearly buried in the sand, and all within a circle perhaps a quarter of a mile’s diameter.
When I saw some, I looked around closely for more, and made a careful reckoningof the place with my instruments. I also took pictures of 10 or 12 of the most typical blocks,and will enclose the prints for you to see. I turned my information and pictures over to thegovernment at Perth, but they have done nothing with them. Then I met Dr. Boyle, who had readyour articles in the Journal of the American Psychological Society, and in time happenedto mention the stones. He was enormously interested, and became quite excited when I shewedhim my snapshots, saying that the stones and markings were just like those of the masonry youhad dreamed about and seen described in legends. He meant to write you, but was delayed. Meanwhilehe sent me most of the magazines with your articles, and I saw at once from your drawings anddescriptions that my stones are certainly the kind you mean. You can appreciate this from theenclosed prints. Later on you will hear directly from Dr. Boyle.
Now I can understand how important all this will be to you. Without questionwe are faced with the remains of an unknown civilisation older than any dreamed of before, andforming a basis for your legends. As a mining engineer, I have some knowledge of geology, andcan tell you that these blocks are so ancient they frighten me. They are mostly sandstone andgranite, though one is almost certainly made of a queer sort of cement or concrete.They bear evidence of water action, as if this part of the world had been submerged and comeup again after long ages—all since these blocks were made and used. It is a matter ofhundreds of thousands of years—or heaven knows how much more. I don’t like to thinkabout it.
In view of your previous diligent work in tracking down the legends and everythingconnected with them, I cannot doubt but that you will want to lead an expedition to the desertand make some archaeological excavations. Both Dr. Boyle and I are prepared to coöperatein such work if you—or organisations known to you—can furnish the funds. I can gettogether a dozen miners for the heavy digging—the blacks would be of no use, for I’vefound that they have an almost maniacal fear of this particular spot. Boyle and I are sayingnothing to others, for you very obviously ought to have precedence in any discoveries or credit.
The place can be reached from Pilbarra in about 4 days by motor tractor—whichwe’d need for our apparatus. It is somewhat west and south of Warburton’s path of1873, and 100 miles southeast of Joanna Spring. We could float things up the De Grey River insteadof starting from Pilbarra—but all that can be talked over later. Roughly, the stones lieat a point about 22° 3′ 14″ South Latitude, 125° 0′ 39″ EastLongitude. The climate is tropical, and the desert conditions are trying. Any expedition had betterbe made in winter—June or July or August. I shall welcome further correspondence upon thissubject, and am keenly eager to assist in any plan you may devise. After studying your articles Iam deeply impressed with the profound significance of the whole matter. Dr. Boyle will write later.When rapid communication is needed, a cable to Perth can be relayed by wireless.
Hoping profoundly for an early message,
Believeme,
Most faithfully yours,
Robert B. F.Mackenzie.Of the immediate aftermath of this letter, much can be learned from the press.My good fortune in securing the backing of Miskatonic University was great, and both Mr. Mackenzieand Dr. Boyle proved invaluable in arranging matters at the Australian end. We were not toospecific with the public about our objects, since the whole matter would have lent itself unpleasantlyto sensational and jocose treatment by the cheaper newspapers. As a result, printed reportswere sparing; but enough appeared to tell of our quest for reported Australian ruins and tochronicle our various preparatory steps.
Professors William Dyer of the college’s geology department (leader ofthe Miskatonic Antarctic Expedition of 1930–31), Ferdinand C. Ashley of the departmentof ancient history, and Tyler M. Freeborn of the department of anthropology—together withmy son Wingate—accompanied me. My correspondent Mackenzie came to Arkham early in 1935and assisted in our final preparations. He proved to be a tremendously competent and affableman of about fifty, admirably well-read, and deeply familiar with all the conditions of Australiantravel. He had tractors waiting at Pilbarra, and we chartered a tramp steamer of sufficientlylight draught to get up the river to that point. We were prepared to excavate in the most carefuland scientific fashion, sifting every particle of sand, and disturbing nothing which might seemto be in or near its original situation.
Sailing from Boston aboard the wheezy Lexington on March 28, 1935, wehad a leisurely trip across the Atlantic and Mediterranean, through the Suez Canal, down theRed Sea, and across the Indian Ocean to our goal. I need not tell how the sight of the low,sandy West Australian coast depressed me, and how I detested the crude mining town and drearygold fields where the tractors were given their last loads. Dr. Boyle, who met us, proved tobe elderly, pleasant, and intelligent—and his knowledge of psychology led him into manylong discussions with my son and me.
Discomfort and expectancy were oddly mingled in most of us when at length ourparty of eighteen rattled forth over the arid leagues of sand and rock. On Friday, May 31st,we forded a branch of the De Grey and entered the realm of utter desolation. A certain positiveterror grew on me as we advanced to this actual site of the elder world behind the legends—aterror of course abetted by the fact that my disturbing dreams and pseudo-memories still besetme with unabated force.
It was on Monday, June 3, that we saw the first of the half-buried blocks.I cannot describe the emotions with which I actually touched—in objective reality—afragment of Cyclopean masonry in every respect like the blocks in the walls of my dream-buildings.There was a distinct trace of carving—and my hands trembled as I recognised part of acurvilinear decorative scheme made hellish to me through years of tormenting nightmare and bafflingresearch.
A month of digging brought a total of some 1250 blocks in varying stages ofwear and disintegration. Most of these were carven megaliths with curved tops and bottoms. Aminority were smaller, flatter, plain-surfaced, and square or octagonally cut—like thoseof the floors and pavements in my dreams—while a few were singularly massive and curvedor slanted in such a manner as to suggest use in vaulting or groining, or as parts of archesor round window casings. The deeper—and the farther north and east—we dug, the moreblocks we found; though we still failed to discover any trace of arrangement among them. ProfessorDyer was appalled at the measureless age of the fragments, and Freeborn found traces of symbolswhich fitted darkly into certain Papuan and Polynesian legends of infinite antiquity. The conditionand scattering of the blocks told mutely of vertiginous cycles of time and geologic upheavalsof cosmic savagery.
We had an aëroplane with us, and my son Wingate would often go up to differentheights and scan the sand-and-rock waste for signs of dim, large-scale outlines—eitherdifferences of level or trails of scattered blocks. His results were virtually negative; forwhenever he would one day think he had glimpsed some significant trend, he would on his nexttrip find the impression replaced by another equally insubstantial—a result of the shifting,wind-blown sand. One or two of these ephemeral suggestions, though, affected me queerly anddisagreeably. They seemed, after a fashion, to dovetail horribly with something which I haddreamed or read, but which I could no longer remember. There was a terrible pseudo-familiarityabout them—which somehow made me look furtively and apprehensively over the abominable,sterile terrain toward the north and northeast.
Around the first week in July I developed an unaccountable set of mixed emotionsabout that general northeasterly region. There was horror, and there was curiosity—butmore than that, there was a persistent and perplexing illusion of memory. I tried allsorts of psychological expedients to get these notions out of my head, but met with no success.Sleeplessness also gained upon me, but I almost welcomed this because of the resultant shorteningof my dream-periods. I acquired the habit of taking long, lone walks in the desert late at night—usuallyto the north or northeast, whither the sum of my strange new impulses seemed subtly to pullme.
Sometimes, on these walks, I would stumble over nearly buried fragments ofthe ancient masonry. Though there were fewer visible blocks here than where we had started,I felt sure that there must be a vast abundance beneath the surface. The ground was less levelthan at our camp, and the prevailing high winds now and then piled the sand into fantastic temporaryhillocks—exposing some traces of the elder stones while it covered other traces. I wasqueerly anxious to have the excavations extend to this territory, yet at the same time dreadedwhat might be revealed. Obviously, I was getting into a rather bad state—all the worsebecause I could not account for it.
An indication of my poor nervous health can be gained from my response to anodd discovery which I made on one of my nocturnal rambles. It was on the evening of July 11th,when a gibbous moon flooded the mysterious hillocks with a curious pallor. Wandering somewhatbeyond my usual limits, I came upon a great stone which seemed to differ markedly from any wehad yet encountered. It was almost wholly covered, but I stooped and cleared away the sand withmy hands, later studying the object carefully and supplementing the moonlight with my electrictorch. Unlike the other very large rocks, this one was perfectly square-cut, with no convexor concave surface. It seemed, too, to be of a dark basaltic substance wholly dissimilar tothe granite and sandstone and occasional concrete of the now familiar fragments.
Suddenly I rose, turned, and ran for the camp at top speed. It was a whollyunconscious and irrational flight, and only when I was close to my tent did I fully realisewhy I had run. Then it came to me. The queer dark stone was something which I had dreamed andread about, and which was linked with the uttermost horrors of the aeon-old legendry. It wasone of the blocks of that basaltic elder masonry which the fabled Great Race held in such fear—thetall, windowless ruins left by those brooding, half-material, alien Things that festered inearth’s nether abysses and against whose wind-like, invisible forces the trap-doors weresealed and the sleepless sentinels posted.
I remained awake all that night, but by dawn realised how silly I had beento let the shadow of a myth upset me. Instead of being frightened, I should have had a discoverer’senthusiasm. The next forenoon I told the others about my find, and Dyer, Freeborn, Boyle, myson, and I set out to view the anomalous block. Failure, however, confronted us. I had formedno clear idea of the stone’s location, and a late wind had wholly altered the hillocksof shifting sand.

VI.

I come now to the crucial and most difficult part of my narrative—all the more difficultbecause I cannot be quite certain of its reality. At times I feel uncomfortably sure that Iwas not dreaming or deluded; and it is this feeling—in view of the stupendous implicationswhich the objective truth of my experience would raise—which impels me to make this record.My son—a trained psychologist with the fullest and most sympathetic knowledge of my wholecase—shall be the primary judge of what I have to tell.
First let me outline the externals of the matter, as those at the camp knowthem. On the night of July 17–18, after a windy day, I retired early but could not sleep.Rising shortly before eleven, and afflicted as usual with that strange feeling regarding thenortheastward terrain, I set out on one of my typical nocturnal walks; seeing and greeting onlyone person—an Australian miner named Tupper—as I left our precincts. The moon, slightlypast full, shone from a clear sky and drenched the ancient sands with a white, leprous radiancewhich seemed to me somehow infinitely evil. There was no longer any wind, nor did any returnfor nearly five hours, as amply attested by Tupper and others who did not sleep through thenight. The Australian last saw me walking rapidly across the pallid, secret-guarding hillockstoward the northeast.
About 3:30 a.m. a violent wind blew up, waking everyone in camp and fellingthree of the tents. The sky was unclouded, and the desert still blazed with that leprous moonlight.As the party saw to the tents my absence was noted, but in view of my previous walks this circumstancegave no one alarm. And yet as many as three men—all Australians—seemed to feel somethingsinister in the air. Mackenzie explained to Prof. Freeborn that this was a fear picked up fromblackfellow folklore—the natives having woven a curious fabric of malignant myth aboutthe high winds which at long intervals sweep across the sands under a clear sky. Such winds,it is whispered, blow out of the great stone huts under the ground where terrible things havehappened—and are never felt except near places where the big marked stones are scattered.Close to four the gale subsided as suddenly as it had begun, leaving the sand hills in new andunfamiliar shapes.
It was just past five, with the bloated, fungoid moon sinking in the west,when I staggered into camp—hatless, tattered, features scratched and ensanguined, andwithout my electric torch. Most of the men had returned to bed, but Prof. Dyer was smoking apipe in front of his tent. Seeing my winded and almost frenzied state, he called Dr. Boyle,and the two of them got me on my cot and made me comfortable. My son, roused by the stir, soonjoined them, and they all tried to force me to lie still and attempt sleep.
But there was no sleep for me. My psychological state was very extraordinary—differentfrom anything I had previously suffered. After a time I insisted upon talking—nervouslyand elaborately explaining my condition. I told them I had become fatigued, and had lain downin the sand for a nap. There had, I said, been dreams even more frightful than usual—andwhen I was awaked by the sudden high wind my overwrought nerves had snapped. I had fled in panic,frequently falling over half-buried stones and thus gaining my tattered and bedraggled aspect.I must have slept long—hence the hours of my absence.
Of anything strange either seen or experienced I hinted absolutely nothing—exercisingthe greatest self-control in that respect. But I spoke of a change of mind regarding the wholework of the expedition, and earnestly urged a halt in all digging toward the northeast. My reasoningwas patently weak—for I mentioned a dearth of blocks, a wish not to offend the superstitiousminers, a possible shortage of funds from the college, and other things either untrue or irrelevant.Naturally, no one paid the least attention to my new wishes—not even my son, whose concernfor my health was very obvious.
The next day I was up and around the camp, but took no part in the excavations.Seeing that I could not stop the work, I decided to return home as soon as possible for thesake of my nerves, and made my son promise to fly me in the plane to Perth—a thousandmiles to the southwest—as soon as he had surveyed the region I wished let alone. If, Ireflected, the thing I had seen was still visible, I might decide to attempt a specific warningeven at the cost of ridicule. It was just conceivable that the miners who knew the local folkloremight back me up. Humouring me, my son made the survey that very afternoon; flying over allthe terrain my walk could possibly have covered. Yet nothing of what I had found remained insight. It was the case of the anomalous basalt block all over again—the shifting sandhad wiped out every trace. For an instant I half regretted having lost a certain awesome objectin my stark fright—but now I know that the loss was merciful. I can still believe my wholeexperience an illusion—especially if, as I devoutly hope, that hellish abyss is neverfound.
Wingate took me to Perth July 20, though declining to abandon the expeditionand return home. He stayed with me until the 25th, when the steamer for Liverpool sailed. Now,in the cabin of the Empress, I am pondering long and frantically on the entire matter,and have decided that my son at least must be informed. It shall rest with him whether to diffusethe matter more widely. In order to meet any eventuality I have prepared this summary of mybackground—as already known in a scattered way to others—and will now tell as brieflyas possible what seemed to happen during my absence from the camp that hideous night.
Nerves on edge, and whipped into a kind of perverse eagerness by that inexplicable,dread-mingled, pseudo-mnemonic urge toward the northeast, I plodded on beneath the evil, burningmoon. Here and there I saw, half-shrouded by the sand, those primal Cyclopean blocks left fromnameless and forgotten aeons. The incalculable age and brooding horror of this monstrous wastebegan to oppress me as never before, and I could not keep from thinking of my maddening dreams,of the frightful legends which lay behind them, and of the present fears of natives and minersconcerning the desert and its carven stones.
And yet I plodded on as if to some eldritch rendezvous—more and moreassailed by bewildering fancies, compulsions, and pseudo-memories. I thought of some of thepossible contours of the lines of stones as seen by my son from the air, and wondered why theyseemed at once so ominous and so familiar. Something was fumbling and rattling at the latchof my recollection, while another unknown force sought to keep the portal barred.
The night was windless, and the pallid sand curved upward and downward likefrozen waves of the sea. I had no goal, but somehow ploughed along as if with fate-bound assurance.My dreams welled up into the waking world, so that each sand-embedded megalith seemed part ofendless rooms and corridors of pre-human masonry, carved and hieroglyphed with symbols thatI knew too well from years of custom as a captive mind of the Great Race. At moments I fanciedI saw those omniscient conical horrors moving about at their accustomed tasks, and I fearedto look down lest I find myself one with them in aspect. Yet all the while I saw the sand-coveredblocks as well as the rooms and corridors; the evil, burning moon as well as the lamps of luminouscrystal; the endless desert as well as the waving ferns and cycads beyond the windows. I wasawake and dreaming at the same time.
I do not know how long or how far—or indeed, in just what direction—Ihad walked when I first spied the heap of blocks bared by the day’s wind. It was the largestgroup in one place that I had so far seen, and so sharply did it impress me that the visionsof fabulous aeons faded suddenly away. Again there were only the desert and the evil moon andthe shards of an unguessed past. I drew close and paused, and cast the added light of my electrictorch over the tumbled pile. A hillock had blown away, leaving a low, irregularly round massof megaliths and smaller fragments some forty feet across and from two to eight feet high.
From the very outset I realised that there was some utterly unprecedented qualityabout these stones. Not only was the mere number of them quite without parallel, but somethingin the sand-worn traces of design arrested me as I scanned them under the mingled beams of themoon and my torch. Not that any one differed essentially from the earlier specimens we had found.It was something subtler than that. The impression did not come when I looked at one block alone,but only when I ran my eye over several almost simultaneously. Then, at last, the truth dawnedupon me. The curvilinear patterns on many of these blocks were closely related—partsof one vast decorative conception. For the first time in this aeon-shaken waste I had come upona mass of masonry in its old position—tumbled and fragmentary, it is true, but none theless existing in a very definite sense.
Mounting at a low place, I clambered laboriously over the heap; here and thereclearing away the sand with my fingers, and constantly striving to interpret varieties of size,shape, and style, and relationships of design. After a while I could vaguely guess at the natureof the bygone structure, and at the designs which had once stretched over the vast surfacesof the primal masonry. The perfect identity of the whole with some of my dream-glimpses appalledand unnerved me. This was once a Cyclopean corridor thirty feet tall, paved with octagonal blocksand solidly vaulted overhead. There would have been rooms opening off on the right, and at thefarther end one of those strange inclined planes would have wound down to still lower depths.
I started violently as these conceptions occurred to me, for there was morein them than the blocks themselves had supplied. How did I know that this level should havebeen far underground? How did I know that the plane leading upward should have been behind me?How did I know that the long subterrene passage to the Square of Pillars ought to lie on theleft one level above me? How did I know that the room of machines, and the rightward-leadingtunnel to the central archives, ought to lie two levels below? How did I know that there wouldbe one of those horrible, metal-banded trap-doors at the very bottom, four levels down? Bewilderedby this intrusion from the dream-world, I found myself shaking and bathed in a cold perspiration.
Then, as a last, intolerable touch, I felt that faint, insidious stream ofcool air trickling upward from a depressed place near the centre of the huge heap. Instantly,as once before, my visions faded, and I saw again only the evil moonlight, the brooding desert,and the spreading tumulus of palaeogean masonry. Something real and tangible, yet fraught withinfinite suggestions of nighted mystery, now confronted me. For that stream of air could arguebut one thing—a hidden gulf of great size beneath the disordered blocks on the surface.
My first thought was of the sinister blackfellow legends of vast undergroundhuts among the megaliths where horrors happen and great winds are born. Then thoughts of myown dreams came back, and I felt dim pseudo-memories tugging at my mind. What manner of placelay below me? What primal, inconceivable source of age-old myth-cycles and haunting nightmaresmight I be on the brink of uncovering? It was only for a moment that I hesitated, for more thancuriosity and scientific zeal was driving me on and working against my growing fear.
I seemed to move almost automatically, as if in the clutch of some compellingfate. Pocketing my torch, and struggling with a strength that I had not thought I possessed,I wrenched aside first one titan fragment of stone and then another, till there welled up astrong draught whose dampness contrasted oddly with the desert’s dry air. A black riftbegan to yawn, and at length—when I had pushed away every fragment small enough to budge—theleprous moonlight blazed on an aperture of ample width to admit me.
I drew out my torch and cast a brilliant beam into the opening. Below me wasa chaos of tumbled masonry, sloping roughly down toward the north at an angle of about forty-fivedegrees, and evidently the result of some bygone collapse from above. Between its surface andthe ground level was a gulf of impenetrable blackness at whose upper edge were signs of gigantic,stress-heaved vaulting. At this point, it appeared, the desert’s sands lay directly upona floor of some titan structure of earth’s youth—how preserved through aeons ofgeologic convulsion I could not then and cannot now even attempt to guess.
In retrospect, the barest idea of a sudden, lone descent into such a doubtfulabyss—and at a time when one’s whereabouts were unknown to any living soul—seemslike the utter apex of insanity. Perhaps it was—yet that night I embarked without hesitancyupon such a descent. Again there was manifest that lure and driving of fatality which had allalong seemed to direct my course. With torch flashing intermittently to save the battery, Icommenced a mad scramble down the sinister, Cyclopean incline below the opening—sometimesfacing forward as I found good hand and foot holds, and at other times turning to face the heapof megaliths as I clung and fumbled more precariously. In two directions beside me, distantwalls of carven, crumbling masonry loomed dimly under the direct beams of my torch. Ahead, however,was only unbroken blackness.
I kept no track of time during my downward scramble. So seething with bafflinghints and images was my mind, that all objective matters seemed withdrawn into incalculabledistances. Physical sensation was dead, and even fear remained as a wraith-like, inactive gargoyleleering impotently at me. Eventually I reached a level floor strown with fallen blocks, shapelessfragments of stone, and sand and detritus of every kind. On either side—perhaps thirtyfeet apart—rose massive walls culminating in huge groinings. That they were carved I couldjust discern, but the nature of the carvings was beyond my perception. What held me the mostwas the vaulting overhead. The beam from my torch could not reach the roof, but the lower partsof the monstrous arches stood out distinctly. And so perfect was their identity with what Ihad seen in countless dreams of the elder world, that I trembled actively for the first time.
Behind and high above, a faint luminous blur told of the distant moonlit worldoutside. Some vague shred of caution warned me that I should not let it out of my sight, lestI have no guide for my return. I now advanced toward the wall on my left, where the traces ofcarving were plainest. The littered floor was nearly as hard to traverse as the downward heaphad been, but I managed to pick my difficult way. At one place I heaved aside some blocks andkicked away the detritus to see what the pavement was like, and shuddered at the utter, fatefulfamiliarity of the great octagonal stones whose buckled surface still held roughly together.
Reaching a convenient distance from the wall, I cast the torchlight slowlyand carefully over its worn remnants of carving. Some bygone influx of water seemed to haveacted on the sandstone surface, while there were curious incrustations which I could not explain.In places the masonry was very loose and distorted, and I wondered how many aeons more thisprimal, hidden edifice could keep its remaining traces of form amidst earth’s heavings.
But it was the carvings themselves that excited me most. Despite their time-crumbledstate, they were relatively easy to trace at close range; and the complete, intimate familiarityof every detail almost stunned my imagination. That the major attributes of this hoary masonryshould be familiar, was not beyond normal credibility. Powerfully impressing the weavers ofcertain myths, they had become embodied in a stream of cryptic lore which, somehow coming tomy notice during the amnesic period, had evoked vivid images in my subconscious mind. But howcould I explain the exact and minute fashion in which each line and spiral of these strangedesigns tallied with what I had dreamt for more than a score of years? What obscure, forgotteniconography could have reproduced each subtle shading and nuance which so persistently, exactly,and unvaryingly besieged my sleeping vision night after night?
For this was no chance or remote resemblance. Definitely and absolutely, themillennially ancient, aeon-hidden corridor in which I stood was the original of something Iknew in sleep as intimately as I knew my own house in Crane Street, Arkham. True, my dreamsshewed the place in its undecayed prime; but the identity was no less real on that account.I was wholly and horribly oriented. The particular structure I was in was known to me. Known,too, was its place in that terrible elder city of dreams. That I could visit unerringly anypoint in that structure or in that city which had escaped the changes and devastations of uncountedages, I realised with hideous and instinctive certainty. What in God’s name could allthis mean? How had I come to know what I knew? And what awful reality could lie behind thoseantique tales of the beings who had dwelt in this labyrinth of primordial stone?
Words can convey only fractionally the welter of dread and bewilderment whichate at my spirit. I knew this place. I knew what lay before me, and what had lain overhead beforethe myriad towering stories had fallen to dust and debris and the desert. No need now, I thoughtwith a shudder, to keep that faint blur of moonlight in view. I was torn betwixt a longing toflee and a feverish mixture of burning curiosity and driving fatality. What had happened tothis monstrous megalopolis of eld in the millions of years since the time of my dreams? Of thesubterrene mazes which had underlain the city and linked all its titan towers, how much hadstill survived the writhings of earth’s crust?
Had I come upon a whole buried world of unholy archaism? Could I still findthe house of the writing-master, and the tower where S’gg’ha, a captive mind fromthe star-headed vegetable carnivores of Antarctica, had chiselled certain pictures on the blankspaces of the walls? Would the passage at the second level down, to the hall of the alien minds,be still unchoked and traversable? In that hall the captive mind of an incredible entity—ahalf-plastic denizen of the hollow interior of an unknown trans-Plutonian planet eighteen millionyears in the future—had kept a certain thing which it had modelled from clay.
I shut my eyes and put my hand to my head in a vain, pitiful effort to drivethese insane dream-fragments from my consciousness. Then, for the first time, I felt acutelythe coolness, motion, and dampness of the surrounding air. Shuddering, I realised that a vastchain of aeon-dead black gulfs must indeed be yawning somewhere beyond and below me. I thoughtof the frightful chambers and corridors and inclines as I recalled them from my dreams. Wouldthe way to the central archives still be open? Again that driving fatality tugged insistentlyat my brain as I recalled the awesome records that once lay cased in those rectangular vaultsof rustless metal.
There, said the dreams and legends, had reposed the whole history, past andfuture, of the cosmic space-time continuum—written by captive minds from every orb andevery age in the solar system. Madness, of course—but had I not now stumbled into a nightedworld as mad as I? I thought of the locked metal shelves, and of the curious knob-twistingsneeded to open each one. My own came vividly into my consciousness. How often had I gone throughthat intricate routine of varied turns and pressures in the terrestrial vertebrate section onthe lowest level! Every detail was fresh and familiar. If there were such a vault as I had dreamedof, I could open it in a moment. It was then that madness took me utterly. An instant later,and I was leaping and stumbling over the rocky debris toward the well-remembered incline tothe depths below.

VII.

From that point forward my impressions are scarcely to be relied on—indeed, I still possessa final, desperate hope that they all form parts of some daemoniac dream—or illusion bornof delirium. A fever raged in my brain, and everything came to me through a kind of haze—sometimesonly intermittently. The rays of my torch shot feebly into the engulfing blackness, bringingphantasmal flashes of hideously familiar walls and carvings, all blighted with the decay ofages. In one place a tremendous mass of vaulting had fallen, so that I had to clamber over amighty mound of stones reaching almost to the ragged, grotesquely stalactited roof. It was allthe ultimate apex of nightmare, made worse by the blasphemous tug of pseudo-memory. One thingonly was unfamiliar, and that was my own size in relation to the monstrous masonry. I felt oppressedby a sense of unwonted smallness, as if the sight of these towering walls from a mere humanbody was something wholly new and abnormal. Again and again I looked nervously down at myself,vaguely disturbed by the human form I possessed.
Onward through the blackness of the abyss I leaped, plunged, and staggered—oftenfalling and bruising myself, and once nearly shattering my torch. Every stone and corner ofthat daemoniac gulf was known to me, and at many points I stopped to cast beams of light throughchoked and crumbling yet familiar archways. Some rooms had totally collapsed; others were bareor debris-filled. In a few I saw masses of metal—some fairly intact, some broken, andsome crushed or battered—which I recognised as the colossal pedestals or tables of mydreams. What they could in truth have been, I dared not guess.
I found the downward incline and began its descent—though after a timehalted by a gaping, ragged chasm whose narrowest point could not be much less than four feetacross. Here the stonework had fallen through, revealing incalculable inky depths beneath. Iknew there were two more cellar levels in this titan edifice, and trembled with fresh panicas I recalled the metal-clamped trap-door on the lowest one. There could be no guards now—forwhat had lurked beneath had long since done its hideous work and sunk into its long decline.By the time of the post-human beetle race it would be quite dead. And yet, as I thought of thenative legends, I trembled anew.
It cost me a terrible effort to vault that yawning chasm, since the litteredfloor prevented a running start—but madness drove me on. I chose a place close to theleft-hand wall—where the rift was least wide and the landing-spot reasonably clear ofdangerous debris—and after one frantic moment reached the other side in safety. At lastgaining the lower level, I stumbled on past the archway of the room of machines, within whichwere fantastic ruins of metal half-buried beneath fallen vaulting. Everything was where I knewit would be, and I climbed confidently over the heaps which barred the entrance of a vast transversecorridor. This, I realised, would take me under the city to the central archives.
Endless ages seemed to unroll as I stumbled, leaped, and crawled along thatdebris-cluttered corridor. Now and then I could make out carvings on the age-stained walls—somefamiliar, others seemingly added since the period of my dreams. Since this was a subterrenehouse-connecting highway, there were no archways save when the route led through the lower levelsof various buildings. At some of these intersections I turned aside long enough to look downwell-remembered corridors and into well-remembered rooms. Twice only did I find any radicalchanges from what I had dreamed of—and in one of these cases I could trace the sealed-upoutlines of the archway I remembered.
I shook violently, and felt a curious surge of retarding weakness, as I steereda hurried and reluctant course through the crypt of one of those great windowless ruined towerswhose alien basalt masonry bespoke a whispered and horrible origin. This primal vault was roundand fully two hundred feet across, with nothing carved upon the dark-hued stonework. The floorwas here free from anything save dust and sand, and I could see the apertures leading upwardand downward. There were no stairs or inclines—indeed, my dreams had pictured those eldertowers as wholly untouched by the fabulous Great Race. Those who had built them had not neededstairs or inclines. In the dreams, the downward aperture had been tightly sealed and nervouslyguarded. Now it lay open—black and yawning, and giving forth a current of cool, damp air.Of what limitless caverns of eternal night might brood below, I would not permit myself to think.
Later, clawing my way along a badly heaped section of the corridor, I reacheda place where the roof had wholly caved in. The debris rose like a mountain, and I climbed upover it, passing through a vast empty space where my torchlight could reveal neither walls norvaulting. This, I reflected, must be the cellar of the house of the metal-purveyors, frontingon the third square not far from the archives. What had happened to it I could not conjecture.
I found the corridor again beyond the mountain of detritus and stones, butafter a short distance encountered a wholly choked place where the fallen vaulting almost touchedthe perilously sagging ceiling. How I managed to wrench and tear aside enough blocks to afforda passage, and how I dared disturb the tightly packed fragments when the least shift of equilibriummight have brought down all the tons of superincumbent masonry to crush me to nothingness, Ido not know. It was sheer madness that impelled and guided me—if, indeed, my whole undergroundadventure was not—as I hope—a hellish delusion or phase of dreaming. But I did make—ordream that I made—a passage that I could squirm through. As I wriggled over the moundof debris—my torch, switched continuously on, thrust deeply within my mouth—I feltmyself torn by the fantastic stalactites of the jagged floor above me.
I was now close to the great underground archival structure which seemed toform my goal. Sliding and clambering down the farther side of the barrier, and picking my wayalong the remaining stretch of corridor with hand-held, intermittently flashing torch, I cameat last to a low, circular crypt with arches—still in a marvellous state of preservation—openingoff on every side. The walls, or such parts of them as lay within reach of my torchlight, weredensely hieroglyphed and chiselled with typical curvilinear symbols—some added since theperiod of my dreams.
This, I realised, was my fated destination, and I turned at once through afamiliar archway on my left. That I could find a clear passage up and down the incline to allthe surviving levels, I had oddly little doubt. This vast, earth-protected pile, housing theannals of all the solar system, had been built with supernal skill and strength to last as longas that system itself. Blocks of stupendous size, poised with mathematical genius and boundwith cements of incredible toughness, had combined to form a mass as firm as the planet’srocky core. Here, after ages more prodigious than I could sanely grasp, its buried bulk stoodin all its essential contours; the vast, dust-drifted floors scarce sprinkled with the litterelsewhere so dominant.
The relatively easy walking from this point onward went curiously to my head.All the frantic eagerness hitherto frustrated by obstacles now took itself out in a kind offebrile speed, and I literally raced along the low-roofed, monstrously well-remembered aislesbeyond the archway. I was past being astonished by the familiarity of what I saw. On every handthe great hieroglyphed metal shelf-doors loomed monstrously; some yet in place, others sprungopen, and still others bent and buckled under bygone geological stresses not quite strong enoughto shatter the titan masonry. Here and there a dust-covered heap below a gaping empty shelfseemed to indicate where cases had been shaken down by earth-tremors. On occasional pillarswere great symbols or letters proclaiming classes and sub-classes of volumes.
Once I paused before an open vault where I saw some of the accustomed metalcases still in position amidst the omnipresent gritty dust. Reaching up, I dislodged one ofthe thinner specimens with some difficulty, and rested it on the floor for inspection. It wastitled in the prevailing curvilinear hieroglyphs, though something in the arrangement of thecharacters seemed subtly unusual. The odd mechanism of the hooked fastener was perfectly wellknown to me, and I snapped up the still rustless and workable lid and drew out the book within.The latter, as expected, was some twenty by fifteen inches in area, and two inches thick; thethin metal covers opening at the top. Its tough cellulose pages seemed unaffected by the myriadcycles of time they had lived through, and I studied the queerly pigmented, brush-drawn lettersof the text—symbols utterly unlike either the usual curved hieroglyphs or any alphabetknown to human scholarship—with a haunting, half-aroused memory. It came to me that thiswas the language used by a captive mind I had known slightly in my dreams—a mind froma large asteroid on which had survived much of the archaic life and lore of the primal planetwhereof it formed a fragment. At the same time I recalled that this level of the archives wasdevoted to volumes dealing with the non-terrestrial planets.
As I ceased poring over this incredible document I saw that the light of mytorch was beginning to fail, hence quickly inserted the extra battery I always had with me.Then, armed with the stronger radiance, I resumed my feverish racing through unending tanglesof aisles and corridors—recognising now and then some familiar shelf, and vaguely annoyedby the acoustic conditions which made my footfalls echo incongruously in these catacombs ofaeon-long death and silence. The very prints of my shoes behind me in the millennially untroddendust made me shudder. Never before, if my mad dreams held anything of truth, had human feetpressed upon those immemorial pavements. Of the particular goal of my insane racing, my consciousmind held no hint. There was, however, some force of evil potency pulling at my dazed will andburied recollections, so that I vaguely felt I was not running at random.
I came to a downward incline and followed it to profounder depths. Floors flashedby me as I raced, but I did not pause to explore them. In my whirling brain there had begunto beat a certain rhythm which set my right hand twitching in unison. I wanted to unlock something,and felt that I knew all the intricate twists and pressures needed to do it. It would be likea modern safe with a combination lock. Dream or not, I had once known and still knew. How anydream—or scrap of unconsciously absorbed legend—could have taught me a detail sominute, so intricate, and so complex, I did not attempt to explain to myself. I was beyond allcoherent thought. For was not this whole experience—this shocking familiarity with a setof unknown ruins, and this monstrously exact identity of everything before me with what onlydreams and scraps of myth could have suggested—a horror beyond all reason? Probably itwas my basic conviction then—as it is now during my saner moments—that I was notawake at all, and that the entire buried city was a fragment of febrile hallucination.
Eventually I reached the lowest level and struck off to the right of the incline.For some shadowy reason I tried to soften my steps, even though I lost speed thereby. Therewas a space I was afraid to cross on this last, deeply buried floor, and as I drew near it Irecalled what thing in that space I feared. It was merely one of the metal-barred and closelyguarded trap-doors. There would be no guards now, and on that account I trembled and tiptoedas I had done in passing through that black basalt vault where a similar trap-door had yawned.I felt a current of cool, damp air, as I had felt there, and wished that my course led in anotherdirection. Why I had to take the particular course I was taking, I did not know.
When I came to the space I saw that the trap-door yawned widely open. Aheadthe shelves began again, and I glimpsed on the floor before one of them a heap very thinly coveredwith dust, where a number of cases had recently fallen. At the same moment a fresh wave of panicclutched me, though for some time I could not discover why. Heaps of fallen cases were not uncommon,for all through the aeons this lightless labyrinth had been racked by the heavings of earthand had echoed at intervals to the deafening clatter of toppling objects. It was only when Iwas nearly across the space that I realised why I shook so violently.
Not the heap, but something about the dust of the level floor was troublingme. In the light of my torch it seemed as if that dust were not as even as it ought to be—therewere places where it looked thinner, as if it had been disturbed not many months before. I couldnot be sure, for even the apparently thinner places were dusty enough; yet a certain suspicionof regularity in the fancied unevenness was highly disquieting. When I brought the torchlightclose to one of the queer places I did not like what I saw—for the illusion of regularitybecame very great. It was as if there were regular lines of composite impressions—impressionsthat went in threes, each slightly over a foot square, and consisting of five nearly circularthree-inch prints, one in advance of the other four.
These possible lines of foot-square impressions appeared to lead in two directions,as if something had gone somewhere and returned. They were of course very faint, and may havebeen illusions or accidents; but there was an element of dim, fumbling terror about the wayI thought they ran. For at one end of them was the heap of cases which must have clattered downnot long before, while at the other end was the ominous trap-door with the cool, damp wind,yawning unguarded down to abysses past imagination.

VIII.

That my strange sense of compulsion was deep and overwhelming is shewn by its conquest of myfear. No rational motive could have drawn me on after that hideous suspicion of prints and thecreeping dream-memories it excited. Yet my right hand, even as it shook with fright, still twitchedrhythmically in its eagerness to turn a lock it hoped to find. Before I knew it I was past theheap of lately fallen cases and running on tiptoe through aisles of utterly unbroken dust towarda point which I seemed to know morbidly, horribly well. My mind was asking itself questionswhose origin and relevancy I was only beginning to guess. Would the shelf be reachable by ahuman body? Could my human hand master all the aeon-remembered motions of the lock? Would thelock be undamaged and workable? And what would I do—what dare I do—with what (asI now commenced to realise) I both hoped and feared to find? Would it prove the awesome, brain-shatteringtruth of something past normal conception, or shew only that I was dreaming?
The next I knew I had ceased my tiptoe racing and was standing still, staringat a row of maddeningly familiar hieroglyphed shelves. They were in a state of almost perfectpreservation, and only three of the doors in this vicinity had sprung open. My feelings towardthese shelves cannot be described—so utter and insistent was the sense of old acquaintance.I was looking high up, at a row near the top and wholly out of my reach, and wondering how Icould climb to best advantage. An open door four rows from the bottom would help, and the locksof the closed doors formed possible holds for hands and feet. I would grip the torch betweenmy teeth as I had in other places where both hands were needed. Above all, I must make no noise.How to get down what I wished to remove would be difficult, but I could probably hook its movablefastener in my coat collar and carry it like a knapsack. Again I wondered whether the lock wouldbe undamaged. That I could repeat each familiar motion I had not the least doubt. But I hopedthe thing would not scrape or creak—and that my hand could work it properly.
Even as I thought these things I had taken the torch in my mouth and begunto climb. The projecting locks were poor supports; but as I had expected, the opened shelf helpedgreatly. I used both the difficultly swinging door and the edge of the aperture itself in myascent, and managed to avoid any loud creaking. Balanced on the upper edge of the door, andleaning far to my right, I could just reach the lock I sought. My fingers, half-numb from climbing,were very clumsy at first; but I soon saw that they were anatomically adequate. And the memory-rhythmwas strong in them. Out of unknown gulfs of time the intricate secret motions had somehow reachedmy brain correctly in every detail—for after less than five minutes of trying there camea click whose familiarity was all the more startling because I had not consciously anticipatedit. In another instant the metal door was slowly swinging open with only the faintest gratingsound.
Dazedly I looked over the row of greyish case-ends thus exposed, and felt atremendous surge of some wholly inexplicable emotion. Just within reach of my right hand wasa case whose curving hieroglyphs made me shake with a pang infinitely more complex than oneof mere fright. Still shaking, I managed to dislodge it amidst a shower of gritty flakes, andease it over toward myself without any violent noise. Like the other case I had handled, itwas slightly more than twenty by fifteen inches in size, with curved mathematical designs inlow relief. In thickness it just exceeded three inches. Crudely wedging it between myself andthe surface I was climbing, I fumbled with the fastener and finally got the hook free. Liftingthe cover, I shifted the heavy object to my back, and let the hook catch hold of my collar.Hands now free, I awkwardly clambered down to the dusty floor, and prepared to inspect my prize.
Kneeling in the gritty dust, I swung the case around and rested it in frontof me. My hands shook, and I dreaded to draw out the book within almost as much as I longed—andfelt compelled—to do so. It had very gradually become clear to me what I ought to find,and this realisation nearly paralysed my faculties. If the thing were there—and if I werenot dreaming—the implications would be quite beyond the power of the human spirit to bear.What tormented me most was my momentary inability to feel that my surroundings were a dream.The sense of reality was hideous—and again becomes so as I recall the scene.
At length I tremblingly pulled the book from its container and stared fascinatedlyat the well-known hieroglyphs on the cover. It seemed to be in prime condition, and the curvilinearletters of the title held me in almost as hypnotised a state as if I could read them. Indeed,I cannot swear that I did not actually read them in some transient and terrible access of abnormalmemory. I do not know how long it was before I dared to lift that thin metal cover. I temporisedand made excuses to myself. I took the torch from my mouth and shut it off to save the battery.Then, in the dark, I screwed up my courage—finally lifting the cover without turning onthe light. Last of all I did indeed flash the torch upon the exposed page—steeling myselfin advance to suppress any sound no matter what I should find.
I looked for an instant, then almost collapsed. Clenching my teeth, however,I kept silence. I sank wholly to the floor and put a hand to my forehead amidst the engulfingblackness. What I dreaded and expected was there. Either I was dreaming, or time and space hadbecome a mockery. I must be dreaming—but I would test the horror by carrying this thingback and shewing it to my son if it were indeed a reality. My head swam frightfully, even thoughthere were no visible objects in the unbroken gloom to swirl around me. Ideas and images ofthe starkest terror—excited by vistas which my glimpse had opened up—began to throngin upon me and cloud my senses.
I thought of those possible prints in the dust, and trembled at the sound ofmy own breathing as I did so. Once again I flashed on the light and looked at the page as aserpent’s victim may look at his destroyer’s eyes and fangs. Then, with clumsy fingersin the dark, I closed the book, put it in its container, and snapped the lid and the curioushooked fastener. This was what I must carry back to the outer world if it truly existed—ifthe whole abyss truly existed—if I, and the world itself, truly existed.
Just when I tottered to my feet and commenced my return I cannot be certain.It comes to me oddly—as a measure of my sense of separation from the normal world—thatI did not even once look at my watch during those hideous hours underground. Torch in hand,and with the ominous case under one arm, I eventually found myself tiptoeing in a kind of silentpanic past the draught-giving abyss and those lurking suggestions of prints. I lessened my precautionsas I climbed up the endless inclines, but could not shake off a shadow of apprehension whichI had not felt on the downward journey.
I dreaded having to re-pass through that black basalt crypt that was olderthan the city itself, where cold draughts welled up from unguarded depths. I thought of thatwhich the Great Race had feared, and of what might still be lurking—be it ever so weakand dying—down there. I thought of those possible five-circle prints and of what my dreamshad told me of such prints—and of strange winds and whistling noises associated with them.And I thought of the tales of the modern blacks, wherein the horror of great winds and namelesssubterrene ruins was dwelt upon.
I knew from a carven wall symbol the right floor to enter, and came at last—afterpassing that other book I had examined—to the great circular space with the branchingarchways. On my right, and at once recognisable, was the arch through which I had arrived. ThisI now entered, conscious that the rest of my course would be harder because of the tumbled stateof the masonry outside the archive building. My new metal-cased burden weighed upon me, andI found it harder and harder to be quiet as I stumbled among debris and fragments of every sort.
Then I came to the ceiling-high mound of debris through which I had wrencheda scanty passage. My dread at wriggling through again was infinite; for my first passage hadmade some noise, and I now—after seeing those possible prints—dreaded sound aboveall things. The case, too, doubled the problem of traversing the narrow crevice. But I clamberedup the barrier as best I could, and pushed the case through the aperture ahead of me. Then,torch in mouth, I scrambled through myself—my back torn as before by stalactites. As Itried to grasp the case again, it fell some distance ahead of me down the slope of the debris,making a disturbing clatter and arousing echoes which sent me into a cold perspiration. I lungedfor it at once, and regained it without further noise—but a moment afterward the slippingof blocks under my feet raised a sudden and unprecedented din.
The din was my undoing. For, falsely or not, I thought I heard it answeredin a terrible way from spaces far behind me. I thought I heard a shrill, whistling sound, likenothing else on earth, and beyond any adequate verbal description. It may have been only myimagination. If so, what followed has a grim irony—since, save for the panic of this thing,the second thing might never have happened.
As it was, my frenzy was absolute and unrelieved. Taking my torch in my handand clutching feebly at the case, I leaped and bounded wildly ahead with no idea in my brainbeyond a mad desire to race out of these nightmare ruins to the waking world of desert and moonlightwhich lay so far above. I hardly knew it when I reached the mountain of debris which toweredinto the vast blackness beyond the caved-in roof, and bruised and cut myself repeatedly in scramblingup its steep slope of jagged blocks and fragments. Then came the great disaster. Just as I blindlycrossed the summit, unprepared for the sudden dip ahead, my feet slipped utterly and I foundmyself involved in a mangling avalanche of sliding masonry whose cannon-loud uproar split theblack cavern air in a deafening series of earth-shaking reverberations.
I have no recollection of emerging from this chaos, but a momentary fragmentof consciousness shews me as plunging and tripping and scrambling along the corridor amidstthe clangour—case and torch still with me. Then, just as I approached that primal basaltcrypt I had so dreaded, utter madness came. For as the echoes of the avalanche died down, therebecame audible a repetition of that frightful, alien whistling I thought I had heard before.This time there was no doubt about it—and what was worse, it came from a point not behindbut ahead of me.
Probably I shrieked aloud then. I have a dim picture of myself as flying throughthe hellish basalt vault of the Elder Things, and hearing that damnable alien sound piping upfrom the open, unguarded door of limitless nether blacknesses. There was a wind, too—notmerely a cool, damp draught, but a violent, purposeful blast belching savagely and frigidlyfrom that abominable gulf whence the obscene whistling came.
There are memories of leaping and lurching over obstacles of every sort, withthat torrent of wind and shrieking sound growing moment by moment, and seeming to curl and twistpurposefully around me as it struck out wickedly from the spaces behind and beneath. Thoughin my rear, that wind had the odd effect of hindering instead of aiding my progress; as if itacted like a noose or lasso thrown around me. Heedless of the noise I made, I clattered overa great barrier of blocks and was again in the structure that led to the surface. I recall glimpsingthe archway to the room of machines and almost crying out as I saw the incline leading downto where one of those blasphemous trap-doors must be yawning two levels below. But instead ofcrying out I muttered over and over to myself that this was all a dream from which I must soonawake. Perhaps I was in camp—perhaps I was at home in Arkham. As these hopes bolsteredup my sanity I began to mount the incline to the higher level.
I knew, of course, that I had the four-foot cleft to re-cross, yet was tooracked by other fears to realise the full horror until I came almost upon it. On my descent,the leap across had been easy—but could I clear the gap as readily when going uphill,and hampered by fright, exhaustion, the weight of the metal case, and the anomalous backwardtug of that daemon wind? I thought of these things at the last moment, and thought also of thenameless entities which might be lurking in the black abysses below the chasm.
My wavering torch was growing feeble, but I could tell by some obscure memorywhen I neared the cleft. The chill blasts of wind and the nauseous whistling shrieks behindme were for the moment like a merciful opiate, dulling my imagination to the horror of the yawninggulf ahead. And then I became aware of the added blasts and whistling in front of me—tidesof abomination surging up through the cleft itself from depths unimagined and unimaginable.
Now, indeed, the essence of pure nightmare was upon me. Sanity departed—andignoring everything except the animal impulse of flight, I merely struggled and plunged upwardover the incline’s debris as if no gulf had existed. Then I saw the chasm’s edge,leaped frenziedly with every ounce of strength I possessed, and was instantly engulfed in apandaemoniac vortex of loathsome sound and utter, materially tangible blackness.
This is the end of my experience, so far as I can recall. Any further impressionsbelong wholly to the domain of phantasmagoric delirium. Dream, madness, and memory merged wildlytogether in a series of fantastic, fragmentary delusions which can have no relation to anythingreal. There was a hideous fall through incalculable leagues of viscous, sentient darkness, anda babel of noises utterly alien to all that we know of the earth and its organic life. Dormant,rudimentary senses seemed to start into vitality within me, telling of pits and voids peopledby floating horrors and leading to sunless crags and oceans and teeming cities of windowlessbasalt towers upon which no light ever shone.
Secrets of the primal planet and its immemorial aeons flashed through my brainwithout the aid of sight or sound, and there were known to me things which not even the wildestof my former dreams had ever suggested. And all the while cold fingers of damp vapour clutchedand picked at me, and that eldritch, damnable whistling shrieked fiendishly above all the alternationsof babel and silence in the whirlpools of darkness around.
Afterward there were visions of the Cyclopean city of my dreams—not inruins, but just as I had dreamed of it. I was in my conical, non-human body again, and mingledwith crowds of the Great Race and the captive minds who carried books up and down the loftycorridors and vast inclines. Then, superimposed upon these pictures, were frightful momentaryflashes of a non-visual consciousness involving desperate struggles, a writhing free from clutchingtentacles of whistling wind, an insane, bat-like flight through half-solid air, a feverish burrowingthrough the cyclone-whipped dark, and a wild stumbling and scrambling over fallen masonry.
Once there was a curious, intrusive flash of half-sight—a faint, diffusesuspicion of bluish radiance far overhead. Then there came a dream of wind-pursued climbingand crawling—of wriggling into a blaze of sardonic moonlight through a jumble of debriswhich slid and collapsed after me amidst a morbid hurricane. It was the evil, monotonous beatingof that maddening moonlight which at last told me of the return of what I had once known asthe objective, waking world.
I was clawing prone through the sands of the Australian desert, and aroundme shrieked such a tumult of wind as I had never before known on our planet’s surface.My clothing was in rags, and my whole body was a mass of bruises and scratches. Full consciousnessreturned very slowly, and at no time could I tell just where true memory left off and deliriousdream began. There had seemed to be a mound of titan blocks, an abyss beneath it, a monstrousrevelation from the past, and a nightmare horror at the end—but how much of this was real?My flashlight was gone, and likewise any metal case I may have discovered. Had there been sucha case—or any abyss—or any mound? Raising my head, I looked behind me, and saw onlythe sterile, undulant sands of the waste.
The daemon wind died down, and the bloated, fungoid moon sank reddeningly inthe west. I lurched to my feet and began to stagger southwestward toward the camp. What in truthhad happened to me? Had I merely collapsed in the desert and dragged a dream-racked body overmiles of sand and buried blocks? If not, how could I bear to live any longer? For in this newdoubt all my faith in the myth-born unreality of my visions dissolved once more into the hellisholder doubting. If that abyss was real, then the Great Race was real—and its blasphemousreachings and seizures in the cosmos-wide vortex of time were no myths or nightmares, but aterrible, soul-shattering actuality.
Had I, in full hideous fact, been drawn back to a pre-human world of a hundredand fifty million years ago in those dark, baffling days of the amnesia? Had my present bodybeen the vehicle of a frightful alien consciousness from palaeogean gulfs of time? Had I, asthe captive mind of those shambling horrors, indeed known that accursed city of stone in itsprimordial heyday, and wriggled down those familiar corridors in the loathsome shape of my captor?Were those tormenting dreams of more than twenty years the offspring of stark, monstrous memories? Had I once veritably talked with minds from reachless corners of time and space,learned the universe’s secrets past and to come, and written the annals of my own worldfor the metal cases of those titan archives? And were those others—those shocking ElderThings of the mad winds and daemon pipings—in truth a lingering, lurking menace, waitingand slowly weakening in black abysses while varied shapes of life drag out their multimillennialcourses on the planet’s age-racked surface?
I do not know. If that abyss and what it held were real, there is no hope.Then, all too truly, there lies upon this world of man a mocking and incredible shadow out oftime. But mercifully, there is no proof that these things are other than fresh phases of mymyth-born dreams. I did not bring back the metal case that would have been a proof, and so farthose subterrene corridors have not been found. If the laws of the universe are kind, they willnever be found. But I must tell my son what I saw or thought I saw, and let him use his judgmentas a psychologist in gauging the reality of my experience, and communicating this account toothers.
I have said that the awful truth behind my tortured years of dreaming hingesabsolutely upon the actuality of what I thought I saw in those Cyclopean buried ruins. It hasbeen hard for me literally to set down the crucial revelation, though no reader can have failedto guess it. Of course it lay in that book within the metal case—the case which I priedout of its forgotten lair amidst the undisturbed dust of a million centuries. No eye had seen,no hand had touched that book since the advent of man to this planet. And yet, when I flashedmy torch upon it in that frightful megalithic abyss, I saw that the queerly pigmented letterson the brittle, aeon-browned cellulose pages were not indeed any nameless hieroglyphs of earth’syouth. They were, instead, the letters of our familiar alphabet, spelling out the words of theEnglish language in my own handwriting.
