Somewhere, to what remote and fearsome region I know not, Denys Barry has gone. I was with himthe last night he lived among men, and heard his screams when the thing came to him; but allthe peasants and police in County Meath could never find him, or the others, though they searchedlong and far. And now I shudder when I hear the frogs piping in swamps, or see the moon in lonelyplaces.
I had known Denys Barry well in America, where he had grown rich, and had congratulatedhim when he bought back the old castle by the bog at sleepy Kilderry. It was from Kilderry thathis father had come, and it was there that he wished to enjoy his wealth among ancestral scenes.Men of his blood had once ruled over Kilderry and built and dwelt in the castle, but those dayswere very remote, so that for generations the castle had been empty and decaying. After he wentto Ireland Barry wrote me often, and told me how under his care the grey castle was rising towerby tower to its ancient splendour; how the ivy was climbing slowly over the restored walls asit had climbed so many centuries ago, and how the peasants blessed him for bringing back theold days with his gold from over the sea. But in time there came troubles, and the peasantsceased to bless him, and fled away instead as from a doom. And then he sent a letter and askedme to visit him, for he was lonely in the castle with no one to speak to save the new servantsand labourers he had brought from the north.
The bog was the cause of all these troubles, as Barry told me the night I cameto the castle. I had reached Kilderry in the summer sunset, as the gold of the sky lighted thegreen of the hills and groves and the blue of the bog, where on a far islet a strange oldenruin glistened spectrally. That sunset was very beautiful, but the peasants at Ballylough hadwarned me against it and said that Kilderry had become accursed, so that I almost shudderedto see the high turrets of the castle gilded with fire. Barry’s motor had met me at theBallylough station, for Kilderry is off the railway. The villagers had shunned the car and thedriver from the north, but had whispered to me with pale faces when they saw I was going toKilderry. And that night, after our reunion, Barry told me why.
The peasants had gone from Kilderry because Denys Barry was to drain the greatbog. For all his love of Ireland, America had not left him untouched, and he hated the beautifulwasted space where peat might be cut and land opened up. The legends and superstitions of Kilderrydid not move him, and he laughed when the peasants first refused to help, and then cursed himand went away to Ballylough with their few belongings as they saw his determination. In theirplace he sent for labourers from the north, and when the servants left he replaced them likewise.But it was lonely among strangers, so Barry had asked me to come.
When I heard the fears which had driven the people from Kilderry I laughedas loudly as my friend had laughed, for these fears were of the vaguest, wildest, and most absurdcharacter. They had to do with some preposterous legend of the bog, and of a grim guardian spiritthat dwelt in the strange olden ruin on the far islet I had seen in the sunset. There were talesof dancing lights in the dark of the moon, and of chill winds when the night was warm; of wraithsin white hovering over the waters, and of an imagined city of stone deep down below the swampysurface. But foremost among the weird fancies, and alone in its absolute unanimity, was thatof the curse awaiting him who should dare to touch or drain the vast reddish morass. There weresecrets, said the peasants, which must not be uncovered; secrets that had lain hidden sincethe plague came to the children of Partholan in the fabulous years beyond history. In the Book of Invaders it is told that these sons of the Greeks were all buried at Tallaght, butold men in Kilderry said that one city was overlooked save by its patron moon-goddess; so thatonly the wooded hills buried it when the men of Nemed swept down from Scythia in their thirtyships.
Such were the idle tales which had made the villagers leave Kilderry, and whenI heard them I did not wonder that Denys Barry had refused to listen. He had, however, a greatinterest in antiquities; and proposed to explore the bog thoroughly when it was drained. Thewhite ruins on the islet he had often visited, but though their age was plainly great, and theircontour very little like that of most ruins in Ireland, they were too dilapidated to tell thedays of their glory. Now the work of drainage was ready to begin, and the labourers from thenorth were soon to strip the forbidden bog of its green moss and red heather, and kill the tinyshell-paved streamlets and quiet blue pools fringed with rushes.
After Barry had told me these things I was very drowsy, for the travels ofthe day had been wearying and my host had talked late into the night. A manservant shewed meto my room, which was in a remote tower overlooking the village, and the plain at the edge ofthe bog, and the bog itself; so that I could see from my windows in the moonlight the silentroofs from which the peasants had fled and which now sheltered the labourers from the north,and too, the parish church with its antique spire, and far out across the brooding bog the remoteolden ruin on the islet gleaming white and spectral. Just as I dropped to sleep I fancied Iheard faint sounds from the distance; sounds that were wild and half musical, and stirred mewith a weird excitement which coloured my dreams. But when I awaked next morning I felt it hadall been a dream, for the visions I had seen were more wonderful than any sound of wild pipesin the night. Influenced by the legends that Barry had related, my mind had in slumber hoveredaround a stately city in a green valley, where marble streets and statues, villas and temples,carvings and inscriptions, all spoke in certain tones the glory that was Greece. When I toldthis dream to Barry we both laughed; but I laughed the louder, because he was perplexed abouthis labourers from the north. For the sixth time they had all overslept, waking very slowlyand dazedly, and acting as if they had not rested, although they were known to have gone earlyto bed the night before.
That morning and afternoon I wandered alone through the sun-gilded villageand talked now and then with idle labourers, for Barry was busy with the final plans for beginninghis work of drainage. The labourers were not as happy as they might have been, for most of themseemed uneasy over some dream which they had had, yet which they tried in vain to remember.I told them of my dream, but they were not interested till I spoke of the weird sounds I thoughtI had heard. Then they looked oddly at me, and said that they seemed to remember weird sounds,too.
In the evening Barry dined with me and announced that he would begin the drainagein two days. I was glad, for although I disliked to see the moss and the heather and the littlestreams and lakes depart, I had a growing wish to discern the ancient secrets the deep-mattedpeat might hide. And that night my dreams of piping flutes and marble peristyles came to a suddenand disquieting end; for upon the city in the valley I saw a pestilence descend, and then afrightful avalanche of wooded slopes that covered the dead bodies in the streets and left unburiedonly the temple of Artemis on the high peak, where the aged moon-priestess Cleis lay cold andsilent with a crown of ivory on her silver head.
I have said that I awaked suddenly and in alarm. For some time I could nottell whether I was waking or sleeping, for the sound of flutes still rang shrilly in my ears;but when I saw on the floor the icy moonbeams and the outlines of a latticed Gothic window Idecided I must be awake and in the castle at Kilderry. Then I heard a clock from some remotelanding below strike the hour of two, and I knew I was awake. Yet still there came that monotonouspiping from afar; wild, weird airs that made me think of some dance of fauns on distant Maenalus.It would not let me sleep, and in impatience I sprang up and paced the floor. Only by chancedid I go to the north window and look out upon the silent village and the plain at the edgeof the bog. I had no wish to gaze abroad, for I wanted to sleep; but the flutes tormented me,and I had to do or see something. How could I have suspected the thing I was to behold?
There in the moonlight that flooded the spacious plain was a spectacle whichno mortal, having seen it, could ever forget. To the sound of reedy pipes that echoed over thebog there glided silently and eerily a mixed throng of swaying figures, reeling through sucha revel as the Sicilians may have danced to Demeter in the old days under the harvest moon besidethe Cyane. The wide plain, the golden moonlight, the shadowy moving forms, and above all theshrill monotonous piping, produced an effect which almost paralysed me; yet I noted amidst myfear that half of these tireless, mechanical dancers were the labourers whom I had thought asleep,whilst the other half were strange airy beings in white, half indeterminate in nature, but suggestingpale wistful naiads from the haunted fountains of the bog. I do not know how long I gazed atthis sight from the lonely turret window before I dropped suddenly in a dreamless swoon, outof which the high sun of morning aroused me.
My first impulse on awaking was to communicate all my fears and observationsto Denys Barry, but as I saw the sunlight glowing through the latticed east window I becamesure that there was no reality in what I thought I had seen. I am given to strange phantasms,yet am never weak enough to believe in them; so on this occasion contented myself with questioningthe labourers, who slept very late and recalled nothing of the previous night save misty dreamsof shrill sounds. This matter of the spectral piping harassed me greatly, and I wondered ifthe crickets of autumn had come before their time to vex the night and haunt the visions ofmen. Later in the day I watched Barry in the library poring over his plans for the great workwhich was to begin on the morrow, and for the first time felt a touch of the same kind of fearthat had driven the peasants away. For some unknown reason I dreaded the thought of disturbingthe ancient bog and its sunless secrets, and pictured terrible sights lying black under theunmeasured depth of age-old peat. That these secrets should be brought to light seemed injudicious,and I began to wish for an excuse to leave the castle and the village. I went so far as to talkcasually to Barry on the subject, but did not dare continue after he gave his resounding laugh.So I was silent when the sun set fulgently over the far hills, and Kilderry blazed all red andgold in a flame that seemed a portent.
Whether the events of that night were of reality or illusion I shall neverascertain. Certainly they transcend anything we dream of in Nature and the universe; yet inno normal fashion can I explain those disappearances which were known to all men after it wasover. I retired early and full of dread, and for a long time could not sleep in the uncannysilence of the tower. It was very dark, for although the sky was clear the moon was now wellin the wane, and would not rise till the small hours. I thought as I lay there of Denys Barry,and of what would befall that bog when the day came, and found myself almost frantic with animpulse to rush out into the night, take Barry’s car, and drive madly to Ballylough outof the menaced lands. But before my fears could crystallise into action I had fallen asleep,and gazed in dreams upon the city in the valley, cold and dead under a shroud of hideous shadow.
Probably it was the shrill piping that awaked me, yet that piping was not whatI noticed first when I opened my eyes. I was lying with my back to the east window overlookingthe bog, where the waning moon would rise, and therefore expected to see light cast on the oppositewall before me; but I had not looked for such a sight as now appeared. Light indeed glowed onthe panels ahead, but it was not any light that the moon gives. Terrible and piercing was theshaft of ruddy refulgence that streamed through the Gothic window, and the whole chamber wasbrilliant with a splendour intense and unearthly. My immediate actions were peculiar for sucha situation, but it is only in tales that a man does the dramatic and foreseen thing. Insteadof looking out across the bog toward the source of the new light, I kept my eyes from the windowin panic fear, and clumsily drew on my clothing with some dazed idea of escape. I remember seizingmy revolver and hat, but before it was over I had lost them both without firing the one or donningthe other. After a time the fascination of the red radiance overcame my fright, and I creptto the east window and looked out whilst the maddening, incessant piping whined and reverberatedthrough the castle and over all the village.
Over the bog was a deluge of flaring light, scarlet and sinister, and pouringfrom the strange olden ruin on the far islet. The aspect of that ruin I cannot describe—Imust have been mad, for it seemed to rise majestic and undecayed, splendid and column-cinctured,the flame-reflecting marble of its entablature piercing the sky like the apex of a temple ona mountain-top. Flutes shrieked and drums began to beat, and as I watched in awe and terrorI thought I saw dark saltant forms silhouetted grotesquely against the vision of marble andeffulgence. The effect was titanic—altogether unthinkable—and I might have staredindefinitely had not the sound of the piping seemed to grow stronger at my left. Trembling witha terror oddly mixed with ecstasy I crossed the circular room to the north window from whichI could see the village and the plain at the edge of the bog. There my eyes dilated again witha wild wonder as great as if I had not just turned from a scene beyond the pale of Nature, foron the ghastly red-litten plain was moving a procession of beings in such a manner as none eversaw before save in nightmares.
Half gliding, half floating in the air, the white-clad bog-wraiths were slowlyretreating toward the still waters and the island ruin in fantastic formations suggesting someancient and solemn ceremonial dance. Their waving translucent arms, guided by the detestablepiping of those unseen flutes, beckoned in uncanny rhythm to a throng of lurching labourerswho followed dog-like with blind, brainless, floundering steps as if dragged by a clumsy butresistless daemon-will. As the naiads neared the bog, without altering their course, a new lineof stumbling stragglers zigzagged drunkenly out of the castle from some door far below my window,groped sightlessly across the courtyard and through the intervening bit of village, and joinedthe floundering column of labourers on the plain. Despite their distance below me I at onceknew they were the servants brought from the north, for I recognised the ugly and unwieldy formof the cook, whose very absurdness had now become unutterably tragic. The flutes piped horribly,and again I heard the beating of the drums from the direction of the island ruin. Then silentlyand gracefully the naiads reached the water and melted one by one into the ancient bog; whilethe line of followers, never checking their speed, splashed awkwardly after them and vanishedamidst a tiny vortex of unwholesome bubbles which I could barely see in the scarlet light. Andas the last pathetic straggler, the fat cook, sank heavily out of sight in that sullen pool,the flutes and the drums grew silent, and the blinding red rays from the ruins snapped instantaneouslyout, leaving the village of doom lone and desolate in the wan beams of a new-risen moon.
My condition was now one of indescribable chaos. Not knowing whether I wasmad or sane, sleeping or waking, I was saved only by a merciful numbness. I believe I did ridiculousthings such as offering prayers to Artemis, Latona, Demeter, Persephone, and Plouton. All thatI recalled of a classic youth came to my lips as the horrors of the situation roused my deepestsuperstitions. I felt that I had witnessed the death of a whole village, and knew I was alonein the castle with Denys Barry, whose boldness had brought down a doom. As I thought of himnew terrors convulsed me, and I fell to the floor; not fainting, but physically helpless. ThenI felt the icy blast from the east window where the moon had risen, and began to hear the shrieksin the castle far below me. Soon those shrieks had attained a magnitude and quality which cannotbe written of, and which make me faint as I think of them. All I can say is that they came fromsomething I had known as a friend.
At some time during this shocking period the cold wind and the screaming musthave roused me, for my next impression is of racing madly through inky rooms and corridors andout across the courtyard into the hideous night. They found me at dawn wandering mindless nearBallylough, but what unhinged me utterly was not any of the horrors I had seen or heard before.What I muttered about as I came slowly out of the shadows was a pair of fantastic incidentswhich occurred in my flight; incidents of no significance, yet which haunt me unceasingly whenI am alone in certain marshy places or in the moonlight.
As I fled from that accursed castle along the bog’s edge I heard a newsound; common, yet unlike any I had heard before at Kilderry. The stagnant waters, lately quitedevoid of animal life, now teemed with a horde of slimy enormous frogs which piped shrilly andincessantly in tones strangely out of keeping with their size. They glistened bloated and greenin the moonbeams, and seemed to gaze up at the fount of light. I followed the gaze of one veryfat and ugly frog, and saw the second of the things which drove my senses away.
Stretching directly from the strange olden ruin on the far islet to the waningmoon, my eyes seemed to trace a beam of faint quivering radiance having no reflection in thewaters of the bog. And upward along that pallid path my fevered fancy pictured a thin shadowslowly writhing; a vague contorted shadow struggling as if drawn by unseen daemons. Crazed asI was, I saw in that awful shadow a monstrous resemblance—a nauseous, unbelievable caricature—ablasphemous effigy of him who had been Denys Barry.
