The horrible conclusion which had been gradually obtruding itself upon my confused and reluctantmind was now an awful certainty. I was lost, completely, hopelessly lost in the vast and labyrinthinerecesses of the Mammoth Cave. Turn as I might, in no direction could my straining vision seizeon any object capable of serving as a guidepost to set me on the outward path. That nevermoreshould I behold the blessed light of day, or scan the pleasant hills and dales of the beautifulworld outside, my reason could no longer entertain the slightest unbelief. Hope had departed.Yet, indoctrinated as I was by a life of philosophical study, I derived no small measure ofsatisfaction from my unimpassioned demeanour; for although I had frequently read of the wildfrenzies into which were thrown the victims of similar situations, I experienced none of these,but stood quiet as soon as I clearly realised the loss of my bearings.
Nor did the thought that I had probably wandered beyond the utmost limits ofan ordinary search cause me to abandon my composure even for a moment. If I must die, I reflected,then was this terrible yet majestic cavern as welcome a sepulchre as that which any churchyardmight afford; a conception which carried with it more of tranquility than of despair.
Starving would prove my ultimate fate; of this I was certain. Some, I knew,had gone mad under circumstances such as these, but I felt that this end would not be mine.My disaster was the result of no fault save my own, since unbeknown to the guide I had separatedmyself from the regular party of sightseers; and, wandering for over an hour in forbidden avenuesof the cave, had found myself unable to retrace the devious windings which I had pursued sinceforsaking my companions.
Already my torch had begun to expire; soon I would be enveloped by the totaland almost palpable blackness of the bowels of the earth. As I stood in the waning, unsteadylight, I idly wondered over the exact circumstances of my coming end. I remembered the accountswhich I had heard of the colony of consumptives, who, taking their residence in this giganticgrotto to find health from the apparently salubrious air of the underground world, with itssteady, uniform temperature, pure air, and peaceful quiet, had found, instead, death in strangeand ghastly form. I had seen the sad remains of their ill-made cottages as I passed them bywith the party, and had wondered what unnatural influence a long sojourn in this immense andsilent cavern would exert upon one as healthy and as vigorous as I. Now, I grimly told myself,my opportunity for settling this point had arrived, provided that want of food should not bringme too speedy a departure from this life.
As the last fitful rays of my torch faded into obscurity, I resolved to leaveno stone unturned, no possible means of escape neglected; so summoning all the powers possessedby my lungs, I set up a series of loud shoutings, in the vain hope of attracting the attentionof the guide by my clamour. Yet, as I called, I believed in my heart that my cries were to nopurpose, and that my voice, magnified and reflected by the numberless ramparts of the blackmaze about me, fell upon no ears save my own. All at once, however, my attention was fixed witha start as I fancied that I heard the sound of soft approaching steps on the rocky floor ofthe cavern. Was my deliverance about to be accomplished so soon? Had, then, all my horribleapprehensions been for naught, and was the guide, having marked my unwarranted absence fromthe party, following my course and seeking me out in this limestone labyrinth? Whilst thesejoyful queries arose in my brain, I was on the point of renewing my cries, in order that mydiscovery might come the sooner, when in an instant my delight was turned to horror as I listened;for my ever acute ear, now sharpened in even greater degree by the complete silence of the cave,bore to my benumbed understanding the unexpected and dreadful knowledge that these footfallswere not like those of any mortal man. In the unearthly stillness of this subterraneanregion, the tread of the booted guide would have sounded like a series of sharp and incisiveblows. These impacts were soft, and stealthy, as of the padded paws of some feline. Besides,at times, when I listened carefully, I seemed to trace the falls of four insteadof two feet.
I was now convinced that I had by my cries aroused and attracted some wildbeast, perhaps a mountain lion which had accidentally strayed within the cave. Perhaps, I considered,the Almighty had chosen for me a swifter and more merciful death than that of hunger. Yet theinstinct of self-preservation, never wholly dormant, was stirred in my breast, and though escapefrom the oncoming peril might but spare me for a sterner and more lingering end, I determinednevertheless to part with my life at as high a price as I could command. Strange as it may seem,my mind conceived of no intent on the part of the visitor save that of hostility. Accordingly,I became very quiet, in the hope that the unknown beast would, in the absence of a guiding sound,lose its direction as had I, and thus pass me by. But this hope was not destined for realisation,for the strange footfalls steadily advanced, the animal evidently having obtained my scent,which in an atmosphere so absolutely free from all distracting influences as is that of thecave, could doubtless be followed at great distance.
Seeing therefore that I must be armed for defence against an uncanny and unseenattack in the dark, I grouped about me the largest of the fragments of rock which were strownupon all parts of the floor of the cavern in the vicinity, and, grasping one in each hand forimmediate use, awaited with resignation the inevitable result. Meanwhile the hideous patteringof the paws drew near. Certainly, the conduct of the creature was exceedingly strange. Mostof the time, the tread seemed to be that of a quadruped, walking with a singular lack ofunison betwixt hind and fore feet, yet at brief and infrequent intervals I fancied thatbut two feet were engaged in the process of locomotion. I wondered what species of animal wasto confront me; it must, I thought, be some unfortunate beast who had paid for its curiosityto investigate one of the entrances of the fearful grotto with a lifelong confinement in itsinterminable recesses. It doubtless obtained as food the eyeless fish, bats, and rats of thecave, as well as some of the ordinary fish that are wafted in at every freshet of Green River,which communicates in some occult manner with the waters of the cave. I occupied my terriblevigil with grotesque conjectures of what alterations cave life might have wrought in the physicalstructure of the beast, remembering the awful appearances ascribed by local tradition to theconsumptives who had died after long residence in the cavern. Then I remembered with a startthat, even should I succeed in killing my antagonist, I should never behold its form,as my torch had long since been extinct, and I was entirely unprovided with matches. The tensionon my brain now became frightful. My disordered fancy conjured up hideous and fearsome shapesfrom the sinister darkness that surrounded me, and that actually seemed to press uponmy body. Nearer, nearer, the dreadful footfalls approached. It seemed that I must give ventto a piercing scream, yet had I been sufficiently irresolute to attempt such a thing, my voicecould scarce have responded. I was petrified, rooted to the spot. I doubted if my right armwould allow me to hurl its missile at the oncoming thing when the crucial moment should arrive.Now the steady pat, pat, of the steps was close at hand; now, very close. I couldhear the laboured breathing of the animal, and terror-struck as I was, I realised that it musthave come from a considerable distance, and was correspondingly fatigued. Suddenly the spellbroke. My right hand, guided by my ever trustworthy sense of hearing, threw with full forcethe sharp-angled bit of limestone which it contained, toward that point in the darkness fromwhich emanated the breathing and pattering, and, wonderful to relate, it nearly reached itsgoal, for I heard the thing jump, landing at a distance away, where it seemed to pause.
Having readjusted my aim, I discharged my second missile, this time most effectively,for with a flood of joy I listened as the creature fell in what sounded like a complete collapse,and evidently remained prone and unmoving. Almost overpowered by the great relief which rushedover me, I reeled back against the wall. The breathing continued, in heavy, gasping inhalationsand expirations, whence I realised that I had no more than wounded the creature. And now alldesire to examine the thing ceased. At last something allied to groundless, superstitious,fear had entered my brain, and I did not approach the body, nor did I continue to cast stonesat it in order to complete the extinction of its life. Instead, I ran at full speed in whatwas, as nearly as I could estimate in my frenzied condition, the direction from which I hadcome. Suddenly I heard a sound, or rather, a regular succession of sounds. In another instantthey had resolved themselves into a series of sharp, metallic clicks. This time there was nodoubt. It was the guide. And then I shouted, yelled, screamed, even shrieked with joyas I beheld in the vaulted arches above the faint and glimmering effulgence which I knew tobe the reflected light of an approaching torch. I ran to meet the flare, and before I couldcompletely understand what had occurred, was lying upon the ground at the feet of the guide,embracing his boots, and gibbering, despite my boasted reserve, in a most meaningless and idioticmanner, pouring out my terrible story, and at the same time overwhelming my auditor with protestationsof gratitude. At length I awoke to something like my normal consciousness. The guide had notedmy absence upon the arrival of the party at the entrance of the cave, and had, from his ownintuitive sense of direction, proceeded to make a thorough canvass of the by-passages just aheadof where he had last spoken to me, locating my whereabouts after a quest of about four hours.
By the time he had related this to me, I, emboldened by his torch and his company,began to reflect upon the strange beast which I had wounded but a short distance back in thedarkness, and suggested that we ascertain, by the rushlight’s aid, what manner of creaturewas my victim. Accordingly I retraced my steps, this time with a courage born of companionship,to the scene of my terrible experience. Soon we descried a white object upon the floor, an objectwhiter even than the gleaming limestone itself. Cautiously advancing, we gave vent to a simultaneousejaculation of wonderment, for of all the unnatural monsters either of us had in our lifetimesbeheld, this was in surpassing degree the strangest. It appeared to be an anthropoid ape oflarge proportions, escaped, perhaps, from some itinerant menagerie. Its hair was snow-white,a thing due no doubt to the bleaching action of a long existence within the inky confines ofthe cave, but it was also surprisingly thin, being indeed largely absent save on the head, whereit was of such length and abundance that it fell over the shoulders in considerable profusion.The face was turned away from us, as the creature lay almost directly upon it. The inclinationof the limbs was very singular, explaining, however, the alternation in their use which I hadbefore noted, whereby the beast used sometimes all four, and on other occasions but two forits progress. From the tips of the fingers or toes long nail-like claws extended. The handsor feet were not prehensile, a fact that I ascribed to that long residence in the cave which,as I before mentioned, seemed evident from the all-pervading and almost unearthly whitenessso characteristic of the whole anatomy. No tail seemed to be present.
The respiration had now grown very feeble, and the guide had drawn his pistolwith the evident intent of despatching the creature, when a sudden sound emitted by thelatter caused the weapon to fall unused. The sound was of a nature difficult to describe. Itwas not like the normal note of any known species of simian, and I wondered if this unnaturalquality were not the result of a long-continued and complete silence, broken by the sensationsproduced by the advent of the light, a thing which the beast could not have seen since its firstentrance into the cave. The sound, which I might feebly attempt to classify as a kind of deep-tonedchattering, was faintly continued. All at once a fleeting spasm of energy seemed to pass throughthe frame of the beast. The paws went through a convulsive motion, and the limbs contracted.With a jerk, the white body rolled over so that its face was turned in our direction. For amoment I was so struck with horror at the eyes thus revealed that I noted nothing else. Theywere black, those eyes, deep, jetty black, in hideous contrast to the snow-white hair and flesh.Like those of other cave denizens, they were deeply sunken in their orbits, and were entirelydestitute of iris. As I looked more closely, I saw that they were set in a face less prognathousthan that of the average ape, and infinitely more hairy. The nose was quite distinct.
As we gazed upon the uncanny sight presented to our vision, the thick lipsopened, and several sounds issued from them, after which the thing relaxed indeath.
The guide clutched my coat-sleeve and trembled so violently that the lightshook fitfully, casting weird, moving shadows on the walls about us.
I made no motion, but stood rigidly still, my horrified eyes fixed upon thefloor ahead.
Then fear left, and wonder, awe, compassion, and reverence succeeded in itsplace, for the sounds uttered by the stricken figure that lay stretched out on the limestonehad told us the awesome truth. The creature I had killed, the strange beast of the unfathomedcave was, or had at one time been, a MAN!!!
