Translated by Elizabeth Neville Berkeley and Lewis Theobald, Jun.

INTRODUCTORY NOTE: The following very singular narrative or record of impressionswas discovered under circumstances so extraordinary that they deserve careful description. Onthe evening of Wednesday, August 27, 1913, at about 8:30 o’clock, the population of thesmall seaside village of Potowonket, Maine, U.S.A., was aroused by a thunderous report accompaniedby a blinding flash; and persons near the shore beheld a mammoth ball of fire dart from theheavens into the sea but a short distance out, sending up a prodigious column of water. Thefollowing Sunday a fishing party composed of John Richmond, Peter B. Carr, and Simon Canfieldcaught in their trawl and dragged ashore a mass of metallic rock, weighing 360 pounds, and looking(as Mr. Canfield said) like a piece of slag. Most of the inhabitants agreed that this heavybody was none other than the fireball which had fallen from the sky four days before; and Dr.Richmond M. Jones, the local scientific authority, allowed that it must be an aerolite or meteoricstone. In chipping off specimens to send to an expert Boston analyst, Dr. Jones discovered imbeddedin the semi-metallic mass the strange book containing the ensuing tale, which is still in hispossession.
In form the discovery resembles an ordinary notebook, about 5 × 3 inches insize, and containing thirty leaves. In material, however, it presents marked peculiarities.The covers are apparently of some dark stony substance unknown to geologists, and unbreakableby any mechanical means. No chemical reagent seems to act upon them. The leaves are much thesame, save that they are lighter in colour, and so infinitely thin as to be quite flexible.The whole is bound by some process not very clear to those who have observed it; a process involvingthe adhesion of the leaf substance to the cover substance. These substances cannot now be separated,nor can the leaves be torn by any amount of force. The writing is Greek of the purest classicalquality, and several students of palaeography declare that the characters are in a cursivehand used about the second century B. C. There is little in the text to determine the date.The mechanical mode of writing cannot be deduced beyond the fact that it must have resembledthat of the modern slate and slate-pencil. During the course of analytical efforts made by thelate Prof. Chambers of Harvard, several pages, mostly at the conclusion of the narrative, wereblurred to the point of utter effacement before being read; a circumstance forming a well-nighirreparable loss. What remains of the contents was done into modern Greek letters by the palaeographerRutherford and in this form submitted to the translators.
Prof. Mayfield of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who examined samplesof the strange stone, declares it a true meteorite; an opinion in which Dr. von Winterfeldtof Heidelberg (interned in 1918 as a dangerous enemy alien) does not concur. Prof. Bradley ofColumbia College adopts a less dogmatic ground; pointing out that certain utterly unknown ingredientsare present in large quantities, and warning that no classification is as yet possible.
The presence, nature, and message of the strange book form so momentous a problem,that no explanation can even be attempted. The text, as far as preserved, is here rendered asliterally as our language permits, in the hope that some reader may eventually hit upon an interpretationand solve one of the greatest scientific mysteries of recent years.
—E.N.B.—L.T., Jun.

(THE STORY)

It was a narrow place, and I was alone. On one side, beyond a margin of vividwaving green, was the sea; blue, bright, and billowy, and sending up vaporous exhalations whichintoxicated me. So profuse, indeed, were these exhalations, that they gave me an odd impressionof a coalescence of sea and sky; for the heavens were likewise bright and blue. On the otherside was the forest, ancient almost as the sea itself, and stretching infinitely inland. Itwas very dark, for the trees were grotesquely huge and luxuriant, and incredibly numerous. Theirgiant trunks were of a horrible green which blended weirdly with the narrow green tract whereonI stood. At some distance away, on either side of me, the strange forest extended down to thewater’s edge; obliterating the shore line and completely hemming in the narrow tract. Someof the trees, I observed, stood in the water itself; as though impatient of any barrier to theirprogress.
I saw no living thing, nor sign that any living thing save myself had everexisted. The sea and the sky and the wood encircled me, and reached off into regions beyondmy imagination. Nor was there any sound save of the wind-tossed wood and of the sea.
As I stood in this silent place, I suddenly commenced to tremble; for thoughI knew not how I came there, and could scarce remember what my name and rank had been, I feltthat I should go mad if I could understand what lurked about me. I recalled things I had learned,things I had dreamed, things I had imagined and yearned for in some other distant life. I thoughtof long nights when I had gazed up at the stars of heaven and cursed the gods that my free soulcould not traverse the vast abysses which were inaccessible to my body. I conjured up ancientblasphemies, and terrible delvings into the papyri of Democritus; but as memories appeared,I shuddered in deeper fear, for I knew that I was alone—horribly alone. Alone, yet closeto sentient impulses of vast, vague kind; which I prayed never to comprehend nor encounter.In the voice of the swaying green branches I fancied I could detect a kind of malignant hatredand daemoniac triumph. Sometimes they struck me as being in horrible colloquy with ghastly andunthinkable things which the scaly green bodies of the trees half hid; hid from sight but notfrom consciousness. The most oppressive of my sensations was a sinister feeling of alienage.Though I saw about me objects which I could name—trees, grass, sea, and sky; I felt thattheir relation to me was not the same as that of the trees, grass, sea, and sky I knew in anotherand dimly remembered life. The nature of the difference I could not tell, yet I shook in starkfright as it impressed itself upon me.
And then, in a spot where I had before discerned nothing but the misty sea,I beheld the Green Meadow; separated from me by a vast expanse of blue rippling water with sun-tippedwavelets, yet strangely near. Often I would peep fearfully over my right shoulder at the trees,but I preferred to look at the Green Meadow, which affected me oddly.
It was while my eyes were fixed upon this singular tract, that I first feltthe ground in motion beneath me. Beginning with a kind of throbbing agitation which held a fiendishsuggestion of conscious action, the bit of bank on which I stood detached itself from the grassyshore and commenced to float away; borne slowly onward as if by some current of resistless force.I did not move, astonished and startled as I was by the unprecedented phenomenon; but stoodrigidly still until a wide lane of water yawned betwixt me and the land of trees. Then I satdown in a sort of daze, and again looked at the sun-tipped water and the Green Meadow.
Behind me the trees and the things they may have been hiding seemed to radiateinfinite menace. This I knew without turning to view them, for as I grew more used to the sceneI became less and less dependent upon the five senses that once had been my sole reliance. Iknew the green scaly forest hated me, yet now I was safe from it, for my bit of bank had driftedfar from the shore.
But though one peril was past, another loomed up before me. Pieces of earthwere constantly crumbling from the floating isle which held me, so that death could not be fardistant in any event. Yet even then I seemed to sense that death would be death to me no more,for I turned again to watch the Green Meadow, imbued with a curious feeling of security in strangecontrast to my general horror.
Then it was that I heard, at a distance immeasurable, the sound of fallingwater. Not that of any trivial cascade such as I had known, but that which might be heard inthe far Scythian lands if all the Mediterranean were poured down an unfathomable abyss. It wastoward this sound that my shrinking island was drifting, yet I was content.
Far in the rear were happening weird and terrible things; things which I turnedto view, yet shivered to behold. For in the sky dark vaporous forms hovered fantastically, broodingover trees and seeming to answer the challenge of the waving green branches. Then a thick mistarose from the sea to join the sky-forms, and the shore was erased from my sight. Though thesun—what sun I knew not—shone brightly on the water around me, the land I had leftseemed involved in a daemoniac tempest where clashed the will of the hellish trees and whatthey hid, with that of the sky and the sea. And when the mist vanished, I saw only the bluesky and the blue sea, for the land and the trees were no more.
It was at this point that my attention was arrested by the singing inthe Green Meadow. Hitherto, as I have said, I had encountered no sign of human life; but nowthere arose to my ears a dull chant whose origin and nature were apparently unmistakable. Whilethe words were utterly undistinguishable, the chant awaked in me a peculiar train of associations;and I was reminded of some vaguely disquieting lines I had once translated out of an Egyptianbook, which in turn were taken from a papyrus of ancient Meroë. Through my brain ran linesthat I fear to repeat; lines telling of very antique things and forms of life in the days whenour earth was exceeding young. Of things which thought and moved and were alive, yet which godsand men would not consider alive. It was a strange book.
As I listened, I became gradually conscious of a circumstance which had beforepuzzled me only subconsciously. At no time had my sight distinguished any definite objects inthe Green Meadow, an impression of vivid homogeneous verdure being the sum total of my perception.Now, however, I saw that the current would cause my island to pass the shore at but a littledistance; so that I might learn more of the land and of the singing thereon. My curiosity tobehold the singers had mounted high, though it was mingled with apprehension.
Bits of sod continued to break away from the tiny tract which carried me, butI heeded not their loss; for I felt that I was not to die with the body (or appearance of abody) which I seemed to possess. That everything about me, even life and death, was illusory;that I had overleaped the bounds of mortality and corporeal entity, becoming a free, detachedthing; impressed me as almost certain. Of my location I knew nothing, save that I felt I couldnot be on the earth-planet once so familiar to me. My sensations, apart from a kind of hauntingterror, were those of a traveller just embarked upon an unending voyage of discovery. For amoment I thought of the lands and persons I had left behind; and of strange ways whereby I mightsome day tell them of my adventurings, even though I might never return.
I had now floated very near the Green Meadow, so that the voices were clearand distinct; but though I knew many languages I could not quite interpret the words of thechanting. Familiar they indeed were, as I had subtly felt when at a greater distance, but beyonda sensation of vague and awesome remembrance I could make nothing of them. A most extraordinaryquality in the voices—a quality which I cannot describe—at once frightenedand fascinated me. My eyes could now discern several things amidst the omnipresent verdure—rocks,covered with bright green moss, shrubs of considerable height, and less definable shapes ofgreat magnitude which seemed to move or vibrate amidst the shrubbery in a peculiar way. Thechanting, whose authors I was so anxious to glimpse, seemed loudest at points where these shapeswere most numerous and most vigorously in motion.
And then, as my island drifted closer and the sound of the distant waterfallgrew louder, I saw clearly the source of the chanting, and in one horrible instant rememberedeverything. Of such things I cannot, dare not tell, for therein was revealed the hideous solutionof all which had puzzled me; and that solution would drive you mad, even as it almost droveme.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I knew now the change through which I had passed, and through whichcertain others who once were men had passed! and I knew the endless cycle of the future whichnone like me may escape.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I shall live forever, be conscious forever, thoughmy soul cries out to the gods for the boon of death and oblivion.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. All isbefore me: beyond the deafening torrent lies the land of Stethelos, where young men are infinitelyold.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The Green Meadow&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I will send a message acrossthe horrible immeasurable abyss.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

[At this point the text becomes illegible.]
