[C.L. Moore]

George Campbell opened sleep-fogged eyes upon darkness and lay gazing out of thetent flap upon the pale August night for some minutes before he roused enough even to wonder whathad wakened him. There was in the keen, clear air of these Canadian woods a soporific as potent asany drug. Campbell lay quiet for a moment, sinking slowly back into the delicious borderlands ofsleep, conscious of an exquisite weariness, an unaccustomed sense of muscles well used, and relaxednow into perfect ease. These were vacation’s most delightful moments, after all—rest,after toil, in the clear, sweet forest night.
Luxuriously, as his mind sank backward into oblivion, he assured himself once morethat three long months of freedom lay before him—freedom from cities and monotony, freedomfrom pedagogy and the University and students with no rudiments of interest in the geology heearned his daily bread by dinning into their obdurate ears. Freedom from—
Abruptly the delightful somnolence crashed about him. Somewhere outside the soundof tin shrieking across tin slashed into his peace. George Campbell sat up jerkily and reached forhis flashlight. Then he laughed and put it down again, straining his eyes through the midnightgloom outside where among the tumbling cans of his supplies a dark anonymous little night beast wasprowling. He stretched out a long arm and groped about among the rocks at the tent door for amissile. His fingers closed on a large stone, and he drew back his hand to throw.
But he never threw it. It was such a queer thing he had come upon in the dark.Square, crystal smooth, obviously artificial, with dull rounded corners. The strangeness of itsrock surfaces to his fingers was so remarkable that he reached again for his flashlight and turnedits rays upon the thing he held.
All sleepiness left him as he saw what it was he had picked up in his idlegroping. It was clear as rock crystal, this queer, smooth cube. Quartz, unquestionably, but not inits usual hexagonal crystallized form. Somehow—he could not guess the method—it had beenwrought into a perfect cube, about four inches in measurement over each worn face. For it wasincredibly worn. The hard, hard crystal was rounded now until its corners were almost gone and thething was beginning to assume the outlines of a sphere. Ages and ages of wearing, years almostbeyond counting, must have passed over this strange clear thing.
But the most curious thing of all was that shape he could make out dimly in theheart of the crystal. For imbedded in its center lay a little disc of a pale and nameless substancewith characters incised deep upon its quartz-enclosed surface. Wedge-shaped characters, faintlyreminiscent of cuneiform writing.
George Campbell wrinkled his brows and bent closer above the little enigma in hishands, puzzling helplessly. How could such a thing as this have imbedded in pure rock crystal?Remotely a memory floated through his mind of ancient legends that called quartz crystals ice whichhad frozen too hard to melt again. Ice—and wedge-shaped cuneiforms—yes, didn’t thatsort of writing originate among the Sumerians who came down from the north in history’sremotest beginnings to settle in the primitive Mesopotamian valley? Then hard sense regainedcontrol and he laughed. Quartz, of course, was formed in the earliest of earth’s geologicalperiods, when there was nothing anywhere but heat and heaving rock. Ice had not come for tens ofmillions of years after this thing must have been formed.
And yet—that writing. Man-made, surely, although its characters wereunfamiliar save in their faint hinting at cuneiform shapes. Or could there, in a Paleozoic world,have been things with a written language who might have graven these cryptic wedges upon thequartz-enveloped disc he held? Or—might a thing like this have fallen meteor-like out of spaceinto the unformed rock of a still molten world? Could it—
Then he caught himself up sharply and felt his ears going hot at the luridness ofhis own imagination. The silence and the solitude and the queer thing in his hands were conspiringto play tricks with his common sense. He shrugged and laid the crystal down at the edge of hispallet, switching off the light. Perhaps morning and a clear head would bring him an answer to thequestions that seemed so insoluble now.
But sleep did not come easily. For one thing, it seemed to him as he flashed offthe light, that the little cube had shone for a moment as if with sustained light before it fadedinto the surrounding dark. Or perhaps he was wrong. Perhaps it had been only his dazzled eyes thatseemed to see the light forsake it reluctantly, glowing in the enigmatic deeps of the thing withqueer persistence.
He lay there unquietly for a long while, turning the unanswered questions over andover in his mind. There was something about this crystal cube out of the unmeasured past, perhapsfrom the dawn of all history, that constituted a challenge that would not let him sleep.

[A. Merritt]

He lay there, it seemed to him, for hours. It had been the lingering light, theluminescence that seemed so reluctant to die, which held his mind. It was as though something inthe heart of the cube had awakened, stirred drowsily, become suddenly alert&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.and intent upon him.
Sheer fantasy, this. He stirred impatiently and flashed his light upon his watch.Close to one o’clock; three hours more before the dawn. The beam fell and was focused upon thewarm crystal cube. He held it there closely, for minutes. He snapped it out, then watched.
There was no doubt about it now. As his eyes accustomed themselves to thedarkness, he saw that the strange crystal was glimmering with tiny fugitive lights deep within itlike threads of sapphire lightnings. They were at its center and they seemed to him to come fromthe pale disk with its disturbing markings. And the disc itself was becominglarger&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the markings shifting shapes&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the cube wasgrowing&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. was it illusion brought about by the tinylightnings.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
He heard a sound. It was the very ghost of a sound, like the ghosts of harpstrings being plucked with ghostly fingers. He bent closer. It came from thecube.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
There was squeaking in the underbrush, a flurry of bodies and an agonized wailinglike a child in death throes and swiftly stilled. Some small tragedy of the wilderness, killer andprey. He stepped over to where it had been enacted, but could see nothing. He again snapped off theflash and looked toward his tent. Upon the ground was a pale blue glimmering. It was the cube. Hestooped to pick it up; then obeying some obscure warning, drew back his hand.
And again, he saw, its glow was dying. The tiny sapphire lightnings flashingfitfully, withdrawing to the disc from which they had come. There was no sound from it.
He sat, watching the luminescence glow and fade, glow and fade, but steadilybecoming dimmer. It came to him that two elements were necessary to produce the phenomenon. Theelectric ray itself, and his own fixed attention. His mind must travel along the ray, fix itselfupon the cube’s heart, if its beat were to wax, until&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what?
He felt a chill of spirit, as though from contact with some alien thing. It wasalien, he knew it; not of this earth. Not of earth’s life. He conquered his shrinking, pickedup the cube and took it into the tent. It was neither warm nor cold; except for its weight he wouldnot have known he held it. He put it upon the table, keeping the torch turned from it; then steppedto the flap of the tent and closed it.
He went back to the table, drew up the camp chair, and turned the flash directlyupon the cube, focusing it so far as he could upon its heart. He sent all his will, all hisconcentration, along it; focusing will and sight upon the disc as he had the light.
As though at command, the sapphire lightnings burned forth. They burst from thedisc into the body of the crystal cube, then beat back, bathing the disc and the markings. Againthese began to change, shifting, moving, advancing, and retreating in the blue gleaming. They wereno longer cuneiform. They were things&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. objects.
He heard the murmuring music, the plucked harp strings. Louder grew the sound andlouder, and now all the body of the cube vibrated to their rhythm. The crystal walls were melting,growing misty as though formed of the mist of diamonds. And the disc itself wasgrowing&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the shapes shifting, dividing and multiplying as though some door hadbeen opened and into it companies of phantasms were pouring. While brighter, more bright grew thepulsing light.
He felt swift panic, tried to withdraw sight and will, dropped the flash. The cubehad no need now of the ray&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and he could not withdraw&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.could not withdraw? Why, he himself was being sucked into that disc which was now a globe withinwhich unnameable shapes danced to a music that bathed the globe with steady radiance.
There was no tent. There was only a vast curtain of sparkling mist behind whichshone the globe.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He felt himself drawn through that mist, sucked through it asif by a mighty wind, straight for the globe.

[H. P. Lovecraft]

As the mist-blurred light of the sapphire suns grew more and more intense, theoutlines of the globe ahead wavered and dissolved to a churning chaos. Its pallor and its motionand its music all blended themselves with the engulfing mist—bleaching it to a palesteel-colour and setting it undulantly in motion. And the sapphire suns, too, melted imperceptiblyinto the greying infinity of shapeless pulsation.
Meanwhile the sense of forward, outward motion grew intolerably, incredibly,cosmically swift. Every standard of speed known to earth seemed dwarfed, and Campbell knew that anysuch flight in physical reality would mean instant death to a human being. Even as it was—inthis strange, hellish hypnosis or nightmare—the quasi-visual impression of meteor-likehurtling almost paralyzed his mind. Though there were no real points of reference in the grey,pulsing void, he felt that he was approaching and passing the speed of light itself. Finally hisconsciousness did go under—and merciful blackness swallowed everything.
It was very suddenly, and amidst the most impenetrable darkness, that thoughts andideas again came to George Campbell. Of how many moments—or years—or eternities—hadelapsed since his flight through the grey void, he could form no estimate. He knew only that heseemed to be at rest and without pain. Indeed, the absence of all physical sensation was thesalient quality of his condition. It made even the blackness seem less solidlyblack—suggesting as it did that he was rather a disembodied intelligence in a state beyondphysical senses, than a corporeal being with senses deprived of their accustomed objects ofperception. He could think sharply and quickly—almost preternaturally so—yet could formno idea whatsoever of his situation.
Half by instinct, he realised that he was not in his own tent. True, he might haveawaked there from a nightmare to a world equally black; yet he knew this was not so. There was nocamp cot beneath him—he had no hands to feel the blankets and canvas surface and flashlightthat ought to be around him—there was no sensation of cold in the air—no flap throughwhich he could glimpse the pale night outside&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something was wrong, dreadfullywrong.
He cast his mind backward and thought of the fluorescent cube which had hypnotisedhim—of that, and all which had followed. He had known that his mind was going, yet had beenunable to draw back. At the last moment there had been a shocking, panic fear—a subconsciousfear beyond even that caused by the sensation of daemonic flight. It had come from some vague flashor remote recollection—just what, he could not at once tell. Some cell-group in the back ofhis head had seemed to find a cloudily familiar quality in the cube—and that familiarity wasfraught with dim terror. Now he tried to remember what the familiarity and the terror were.
Little by little it came to him. Once—long ago, in connection with hisgeological life-work—he had read of something like that cube. It had to do with thosedebatable and disquieting clay fragments called the Eltdown Shards, dug up from pre-carboniferousstrata in southern England thirty years before. Their shape and markings were so queer that a fewscholars hinted at artificiality, and made wild conjectures about them and their origin. They came,clearly, from a time when no human beings could exist on the globe—but their contours andfigurings were damnably puzzling. That was how they got their name.
It was not, however, in the writings of any sober scientist that Campbell had seenthat reference to a crystal, disc-holding globe. The source was far less reputable, and infinitelymore vivid. About 1912 a deeply learned Sussex clergyman of occultist leanings—the ReverendArthur Brooke Winters-Hall—had professed to identify the markings on the Eltdown Shards withsome of the so-called “pre-human hieroglyphs” persistently cherished and esotericallyhanded down in certain mystical circles, and had published at his own expense what purported to bea “translation” of the primal and baffling “inscriptions”—a“translation” still quoted frequently and seriously by occult writers. In this“translation”—a surprisingly long brochure in view of the limited number of“shards” existing—had occurred the narrative, supposedly of pre-human authorship,containing the now frightening reference.
As the story went, there dwelt on a world—and eventually on countless otherworlds—of outer space a mighty order of worm-like beings whose attainments and whose controlof nature surpassed anything within the range of terrestrial imagination. They had mastered the artof interstellar travel early in their career, and had peopled every habitable planet in their owngalaxy—killing off the races they found.
Beyond the limits of their own galaxy—which was not ours—they could notnavigate in person; but in their quest for knowledge of all space and time they discovered a meansof spanning certain transgalactic gulfs with their minds. They devised peculiarobjects—strangely energized cubes of a curious crystal containing hypnotic talismen andenclosed in space-resisting spherical envelopes of an unknown substance—which could beforcibly expelled beyond the limits of their universe, and which would respond to the attraction ofcool solid matter only.
These, of which a few would necessarily land on various inhabited worlds inoutside universes, formed the ether-bridges needed for mental communication. Atmospheric frictionburned away the protecting envelope, leaving the cube exposed and subject to discovery by theintelligent minds of the world where it fell. By its very nature, the cube would attract and rivetattention. This, when coupled with the action of light, was sufficient to set its specialproperties working.
The mind that noticed the cube would be drawn into it by the power of the disc,and would be sent on a thread of obscure energy to the place whence the disc had come—theremote world of the worm-like space-explorers across stupendous galactic abysses. Received in oneof the machines to which each cube was attuned, the captured mind would remain suspended withoutbody or senses until examined by one of the dominant race. Then it would, by an obscure process ofinterchange, be pumped of all its contents. The investigator’s mind would now occupy thestrange machine while the captive mind occupied the interrogator’s worm-like body. Then, inanother interchange, the interrogator’s mind would leap across boundless space to thecaptive’s vacant and unconscious body on the trans-galactic world—animating the alientenement as best it might, and exploring the alien world in the guise of one of its denizens.
When done with exploration, the adventurer would use the cube and its disc inaccomplishing his return—and sometimes the captured mind would be restored safely to its ownremote world. Not always, however, was the dominant race so kind. Sometimes, when a potentiallyimportant race capable of space travel was found, the worm-like folk would employ the cube tocapture and annihilate minds by the thousands, and would extirpate the race for diplomaticreasons—using the exploring minds as agents of destruction.
In other cases sections of the worm-folk would permanently occupy a trans-galacticplanet—destroying the captured minds and wiping out the remaining inhabitants preparatory tosettling down in unfamiliar bodies. Never, however, could the parent civilization be quiteduplicated in such a case; since the new planet would not contain all the materials necessary forthe worm-race’s arts. The cubes, for example, could be made only on the home planet.
Only a few of the numberless cubes sent forth ever found a landing and response onan inhabited world—since there was no such thing as aiming them at goals beyond sight orknowledge. Only three, ran the story, had ever landed on peopled worlds in our own particularuniverse. One of these had struck a planet near the galactic rim two thousand billion years ago,while another had lodged three billion years ago on a world near the centre of the galaxy. Thethird—and the only one ever known to have invaded the solar system—had reached our ownearth 150,000,000 years ago.
It was with this latter that Dr. Winters-Hall’s “translation”chiefly dealt. When the cube struck the earth, he wrote, the ruling terrestrial species was a huge,cone-shaped race surpassing all others before or since in mentality and achievements. This race wasso advanced that it had actually sent minds abroad in both space and time to explore the cosmos,hence recognised something of what had happened when the cube fell from the sky and certainindividuals had suffered mental change after gazing at it.
Realising that the changed individuals represented invading minds, the race’sleaders had them destroyed—even at the cost of leaving the displaced minds exiled in alienspace. They had had experience with even stranger transitions. When, through a mental explorationof space and time, they formed a rough idea of what the cube was, they carefully hid the thing fromlight and sight, and guarded it as a menace. They did not wish to destroy a thing so rich in laterexperimental possibilities. Now and then some rash, unscrupulous adventurer would furtively gainaccess to it and sample its perilous powers despite the consequences—but all such cases werediscovered, and safely and drastically dealt with.
Of this evil meddling the only bad result was that the worm-like outside racelearned from the new exiles what had happened to their explorers on earth, and conceived a violenthatred of the planet and all its life-forms. They would have depopulated it if they could, andindeed sent additional cubes into space in the wild hope of striking it by accident in unguardedplaces—but that accident never came to pass.
The cone-shaped terrestrial beings kept the one existing cube in a special shrineas a relique and basis for experiments, till after aeons it was lost amidst the chaos of war andthe destruction of the great polar city where it was guarded. When, fifty million years ago, thebeings sent their minds ahead into the infinite future to avoid a nameless peril of inner earth,the whereabouts of the sinister cube from space were unknown.
This much, according to the learned occultist, the Eltdown Shards had said. Whatnow made the account so obscurely frightful to Campbell was the minute accuracy with which thealien cube had been described. Every detail tallied—dimensions, consistency, hieroglyphedcentral disc, hypnotic effects. As he thought the matter over and over amidst the darkness of hisstrange situation, he began to wonder whether his whole experience with the crystalcube—indeed, its very existence—were not a nightmare brought on by some freakishsubconscious memory of this old bit of extravagant, charlatanic reading. If so, though, thenightmare must still be in force; since his present apparently bodiless state had nothing ofnormality in it.
Of the time consumed by this puzzled memory and reflection, Campbell could form noestimate. Everything about his state was so unreal that ordinary dimensions and measurements becamemeaningless. It seemed an eternity, but perhaps it was not really long before the suddeninterruption came. What happened was as strange and inexplicable as the blackness it succeeded.There was a sensation—of the mind rather than of the body—and all at once Campbell felt histhoughts swept or sucked beyond his control in tumultuous and chaotic fashion.
Memories arose irresponsibly and irrelevantly. All that he knew—all hispersonal background, traditions, experiences, scholarship, dreams, ideas, and inspirations—welledup abruptly and simultaneously, with a dizzying speed and abundance which soon made him unable tokeep track of any separate concept. The parade of all his mental contents became an avalanche, acascade, a vortex. It was as horrible and vertiginous as his hypnotic flight through space when thecrystal cube pulled him. Finally it sapped his consciousness and brought on fresh oblivion.
Another measureless blank—and then a slow trickle of sensation. This time itwas physical, not mental. Sapphire light, and a low rumble of distant sound. There were tactileimpressions—he could realise that he was lying at full length on something, though there was abaffling strangeness about the feel of his posture. He could not reconcile the pressure of thesupporting surface with his own outlines—or with the outlines of the human form at all. Hetried to move his arms, but found no definite response to the attempt. Instead, there were little,ineffectual nervous twitches all over the area which seemed to mark his body.
He tried to open his eyes more widely, but found himself unable to control theirmechanism. The sapphire light came in a diffused, nebulous manner, and could nowhere be voluntarilyfocussed into definiteness. Gradually, though, visual images began to trickle in curiously andindecisively. The limits and qualities of vision were not those which he was used to, but he couldroughly correlate the sensation with what he had known as sight. As this sensation gained somedegree of stability, Campbell realised that he must still be in the throes of nightmare.
He seemed to be in a room of considerable extent—of medium height, but with alarge proportionate area. On every side—and he could apparently see all four sides atonce—were high, narrowish slits which seemed to serve as combined doors and windows. Therewere singular low tables or pedestals, but no furniture of normal nature and proportions. Throughthe slits streamed floods of sapphire light, and beyond them could be mistily seen the sides androofs of fantastic buildings like clustered cubes. On the walls—in the vertical panels betweenthe slits—were strange markings of an oddly disquieting character. It was some time beforeCampbell understood why they disturbed him so—then he saw that they were, in repeatedinstances, precisely like some of the hieroglyphs on the crystal cube’s disc.
The actual nightmare element, though, was something more than this. It began withthe living thing which presently entered through one of the slits, advancing deliberately towardhim and bearing a metal box of bizarre proportions and glassy, mirror-like surfaces. For this thingwas nothing human—nothing of earth—nothing even of man’s myths and dreams. It was agigantic, pale-grey worm or centipede, as large around as a man and twice as long, with adisc-like, apparently eyeless, cilia-fringed head bearing a purple central orifice. It glided onits rear pairs of legs, with its fore part raised vertically—the legs, or at least two pairsof them, serving as arms. Along its spinal ridge was a curious purple comb, and a fan-shaped tailof some grey membrane ended its grotesque bulk. There was a ring of flexible red spikes around itsneck, and from the twistings of these came clicking, twanging sounds in measured, deliberaterhythms.
Here, indeed, was outré nightmare at its height—capricious fantasy at itsapex. But even this vision of delirium was not what caused George Campbell to lapse a third timeinto unconsciousness. It took one more thing—one final, unbearable touch—to do that. Asthe nameless worm advanced with its glistening box, the reclining man caught in the mirror-likesurface a glimpse of what should have been his own body. Yet—horribly verifying his disorderedand unfamiliar sensations—it was not his own body at all that he saw reflected in theburnished metal. It was, instead, the loathsome, pale-grey bulk of one of the great centipedes.

[Robert E. Howard]

From that final lap of senselessness, he emerged with a full understanding of hissituation. His mind was imprisoned in the body of a frightful native of an alien planet, while,somewhere on the other side of the universe, his own body was housing the monster’spersonality.
He fought down an unreasoning horror. Judged from a cosmic standpoint, why shouldhis metamorphosis horrify him? Life and consciousness were the only realities in the universe. Formwas unimportant. His present body was hideous only according to terrestrial standards. Fear andrevulsion were drowned in the excitement of titanic adventure.
What was his former body but a cloak, eventually to be cast off at death anyway?He had no sentimental illusions about the life from which he had been exiled. What had it evergiven him save toil, poverty, continual frustration and repression? If this life before him offeredno more, at least it offered no less. Intuition told him it offered more—much more.
With the honesty possible only when life is stripped to its naked fundamentals, herealized that he remembered with pleasure only the physical delights of his former life. But he hadlong ago exhausted all the physical possibilities contained in that earthly body. Earth held no newthrills. But in the possession of this new, alien body he felt promises of strange, exoticjoys.
A lawless exultation rose in him. He was a man without a world, free of allconventions or inhibitions of Earth, or of this strange planet, free of every artificial restraintin the universe. He was a god! With grim amusement he thought of his body moving in earth’sbusiness and society, with all the while an alien monster staring out of the windows that wereGeorge Campbell’s eyes on people who would flee if they knew.
Let him walk the earth slaying and destroying as he would. Earth and its races nolonger had any meaning to George Campbell. There he had been one of a billion nonentities, fixed inplace by a mountainous accumulation of conventions, laws and manners, doomed to live and die in hissordid niche. But in one blind bound he had soared above the commonplace. This was not death, butre-birth—the birth of a full-grown mentality, with a new-found freedom that made little ofphysical captivity on Yekub.
He started. Yekub! It was the name of this planet, but how had he known? Then heknew, as he knew the name of him whose body he occupied—Tothe. Memory, deep grooved inTothe’s brain, was stirring in him—shadows of the knowledge Tothe had. Carved deep in thephysical tissues of the brain, they spoke dimly as implanted instincts to George Campbell; and hishuman consciousness seized them and translated them to show him the way not only to safety andfreedom, but to the power his soul, stripped to its primitive impulses, craved. Not as a slavewould he dwell on Yekub, but as a king! Just as of old barbarians had sat on the throne of lordlyempires.
For the first time he turned his attention to his surroundings. He still lay onthe couch-like thing in the midst of that fantastic room, and the centipede man stood before him,holding the polished metal object, and clashing its neck-spikes. Thus it spoke to him, Campbellknew, and what it said he dimly understood, through the implanted thought processes of Tothe, justas he knew the creature was Yukth, supreme lord of science.
But Campbell gave no heed, for he had made his desperate plan, a plan so alien tothe ways of Yekub that it was beyond Yukth’s comprehension and caught him wholly unprepared.Yukth, like Campbell, saw the sharp-pointed metal shard on a nearby table, but to Yukth it was onlya scientific implement. He did not even know it could be used as a weapon. Campbell’s earthlymind supplied the knowledge and the action that followed, driving Tothe’s body into movementsno man of Yekub had ever made before.
Campbell snatched the pointed shard and struck, ripping savagely upward. Yukthreared and toppled, his entrails spilling on the floor. In an instant Campbell was streaking for adoor. His speed was amazing, exhilarating, first fulfillment of the promise of novel physicalsensations.
As he ran, guided wholly by the instinctive knowledge implanted in Tothe’sphysical reflexes, it was as if he were borne by a separate consciousness in his legs. Tothe’sbody was bearing him along a route it had traversed ten thousand times when animated byTothe’s mind.
Down a winding corridor he raced, up a twisted stair, through a carved door, andthe same instincts that had brought him there told him he had found what he sought. He was in acircular room with a domed roof from which shone a livid blue light. A strange structure rose inthe middle of the rainbow-hued floor, tier on tier, each of a separate, vivid color. The ultimatetier was a purple cone, from the apex of which a blue smoky mist drifted upward to a sphere thatpoised in mid-air—a sphere that shone like translucent ivory.
This, the deep-grooved memories of Tothe told Campbell, was the god of Yekub,though why the people of Yekub feared and worshipped it had been forgotten a million years. Aworm-priest stood between him and the altar which no hand of flesh had ever touched. That it couldbe touched was a blasphemy that had never occurred to a man of Yekub. The worm-priest stood infrozen horror until Campbell’s shard ripped the life out of him.
On his centipede-legs Campbell clambered the tiered altar, heedless of its suddenquiverings, heedless of the change that was taking place in the floating sphere, heedless of thesmoke that now billowed out in blue clouds. He was drunk with the feel of power. He feared thesuperstitions of Yekub no more than he feared those of earth. With that globe in his hands he wouldbe king of Yekub. The worm men would dare deny him nothing, when he held their god as hostage. Hereached a hand for the ball—no longer ivory-hued, but red as blood.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

[Frank Belknap Long]

Out of the tent into the pale August night walked the body of George Campbell. Itmoved with a slow, wavering gait between the bodies of enormous trees, over a forest path strewedwith sweet scented pine needles. The air was crisp and cold. The sky was an inverted bowl offrosted silver flecked with stardust, and far to the north the Aurora Borealis splashed streamersof fire.
The head of the walking man lolled hideously from side to side. From the cornersof his lax mouth drooled thick threads of amber froth, which fluttered in the night breeze. Hewalked upright at first, as a man would walk, but gradually as the tent receded, his posturealtered. His torso began almost imperceptibly to slant, and his limbs to shorten.
In a far-off world of outer space the centipede creature that was George Campbellclasped to its bosom a god whose lineaments were red as blood, and ran with insect-like quiveringsacross a rainbow-hued hall and out through massive portals into the bright glow of alien suns.
Weaving between the trees of earth in an attitude that suggested the awkwardloping of a werebeast, the body of George Campbell was fulfilling a mindless destiny. Long,claw-tipped fingers dragged leaves from a carpet of odorous pine needles as it moved toward a wideexpanse of gleaming water.
In the far-off, extra-galactic world of the worm people, George Campbell movedbetween cyclopean blocks of black masonry down long, fern-planted avenues holding aloft the roundred god.
There was a harsh animal cry in the underbrush near the gleaming lake on earthwhere the mind of a worm creature dwelt in a body swayed by instinct. Human teeth sank into softanimal fur, tore at black animal flesh. A little silver fox sank its fangs in frantic retaliationinto a furry human wrist, and thrashed about in terror as its blood spurted. Slowly the body ofGeorge Campbell arose, its mouth splashed with fresh blood. With upper limbs swaying oddly it movedtowards the waters of the lake.
As the variform creature that was George Campbell crawled between the black blocksof stone thousands of worm-shapes prostrated themselves in the scintillating dust before it. Agodlike power seemed to emanate from its weaving body as it moved with a slow, undulant motiontoward a throne of spiritual empire transcending all the sovereignties of earth.
A trapper stumbling wearily through the dense woods of earth near the tent wherethe worm-creature dwelt in the body of George Campbell came to the gleaming waters of the lake anddiscerned something dark floating there. He had been lost in the woods all night, and wearinessenveloped him like a leaden cloak in the pale morning light.
But the shape was a challenge that he could not ignore. Moving to the edge of thewater he knelt in the soft mud and reached out toward the floating bulk. Slowly he pulled it to theshore.
Far off in outer space the worm-creature holding the glowing red god ascended athrone that gleamed like the constellation Cassiopeia under an alien vault of hyper-suns. The greatdeity that he held aloft energized his worm tenement, burning away in the white fire of asupermundane spirituality all animal dross.
On earth the trapper gazed with unutterable horror into the blackened and hairyface of the drowned man. It was a bestial face, repulsively anthropoid in contour, and from itstwisted, distorted mouth black ichor poured.
“He who sought your body in the abysses of Time will occupy an unresponsivetenement,” said the red god. “No spawn of Yekub can control the body of a human.
“On all earth, living creatures rend one another, and feast with unutterablecruelty on their kith and kin. No worm-mind can control a bestial man-body when it yearns to raven.Only man-minds instinctively conditioned through the course of ten thousand generations can keepthe human instincts in thrall. Your body will destroy itself on earth, seeking the blood of itsanimal kin, seeking the cool water where it can wallow at its ease. Seeking eventually destruction,for the death-instinct is more powerful in it than the instincts of life and it will destroy itselfin seeking to return to the slime from which it sprang.”
Thus spoke the round red god of Yekub in a far-off segment of the space-timecontinuum to George Campbell as the latter, with all human desire purged away, sat on a throne andruled an empire of worms more wisely kindly, and benevolently than any man of earth had ever ruledan empire of men.
