Ben Hayden was always a stubborn chap, and once he had heard about those strange statues inthe upper Adirondacks, nothing could keep him from going to see them. I had been his closestacquaintance for years, and our Damon and Pythias friendship made us inseparable at all times.So when Ben firmly decided to go—well, I had to trot along too, like a faithful collie.
“Jack,” he said, “you know Henry Jackson, who was up in a shackbeyond Lake Placid for that beastly spot in his lung? Well, he came back the other day nearlycured, but had a lot to say about some devilish queer conditions up there. He ran into the businessall of a sudden and can’t be sure yet that it’s anything more than a case of bizarresculpture; but just the same his uneasy impression sticks.
“It seems he was out hunting one day, and came across a cave with whatlooked like a dog in front of it. Just as he was expecting the dog to bark he looked again,and saw that the thing wasn’t alive at all. It was a stone dog—such a perfect image,down to the smallest whisker, that he couldn’t decide whether it was a supernaturally cleverstatue or a petrified animal. He was almost afraid to touch it, but when he did he realisedit was surely made of stone.
“After a while he nerved himself up to go into the cave—and therehe got a still bigger jolt. Only a little way in there was another stone figure—or whatlooked like it—but this time it was a man’s. It lay on the floor, on its side, woreclothes, and had a peculiar smile on its face. This time Henry didn’t stop to do anytouching, but beat it straight for the village, Mountain Top, you know. Of course he askedquestions—but they did not get him very far. He found he was on a ticklish subject, for thenatives only shook their heads, crossed their fingers, and muttered something about a ‘MadDan’—whoever he was.
“It was too much for Jackson, so he came home weeks ahead of his plannedtime. He told me all about it because he knows how fond I am of strange things—and oddlyenough, I was able to fish up a recollection that dovetailed pretty neatly with his yarn. Doyou remember Arthur Wheeler, the sculptor who was such a realist that people began calling himnothing but a solid photographer? I think you knew him slightly. Well, as a matter of fact,he ended up in that part of the Adirondacks himself. Spent a lot of time there, and then droppedout of sight. Never heard from again. Now if stone statues that look like men and dogs are turningup around there, it looks to me as if they might be his work—no matter what the rusticssay, or refuse to say, about them. Of course a fellow with Jackson’s nerves might easilyget flighty and disturbed over things like that; but I’d have done a lot of examining beforerunning away.
“In fact, Jack, I’m going up there now to look things over—andyou’re coming along with me. It would mean a lot to find Wheeler—or any of his work.Anyhow, the mountain air will brace us both up.”
So less than a week later, after a long train ride and a jolting bus trip throughbreathlessly exquisite scenery, we arrived at Mountain Top in the late, golden sunlight of aJune evening. The village comprised only a few small houses, a hotel, and the general storeat which our bus drew up; but we knew that the latter would probably prove a focus for suchinformation. Surely enough, the usual group of idlers was gathered around the steps; and whenwe represented ourselves as health-seekers in search of lodgings they had many recommendationsto offer.
Though we had not planned to do any investigating till the next day, Ben couldnot resist venturing some vague, cautious questions when he noticed the senile garrulousnessof one of the ill-clad loafers. He felt, from Jackson’s previous experience, that it wouldbe useless to begin with references to the queer statues; but decided to mention Wheeler asone whom we had known, and in whose fate we consequently had a right to be interested.
The crowd seemed uneasy when Sam stopped his whittling and started talking,but they had slight occasion for alarm. Even this barefoot old mountain decadent tightened upwhen he heard Wheeler’s name, and only with difficulty could Ben get anything coherentout of him.
“Wheeler?” he had finally wheezed. “Oh, yeh—that felleras was all the time blastin’ rocks and cuttin’ ’em up into statues. So yew knowedhim, hey? Wal, they ain’t much we kin tell ye, and mebbe that’s too much. He stayedout to Mad Dan’s cabin in the hills—but not so very long. Got so he wa’nt wantedno more&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by Dan, that is. Kinder soft-spoken and got around Dan’s wifetill the old devil took notice. Pretty sweet on her, I guess. But he took the trail sudden,and nobody’s seen hide nor hair of him since. Dan must a told him sumthin’ prettyplain—bad feller to get agin ye, Dan is! Better keep away from thar, boys, for they ain’tno good in that part of the hills. Dan’s ben workin’ up a worse and worse mood, andain’t seen about no more. Nor his wife, neither. Guess he’s penned her up so’snobody else kin make eyes at her!”
As Sam resumed his whittling after a few more observations, Ben and I exchangedglances. Here, surely, was a new lead which deserved intensive following up. Deciding to lodgeat the hotel, we settled ourselves as quickly as possible; planning for a plunge into the wildhilly country on the next day.
At sunrise we made our start, each bearing a knapsack laden with provisionsand such tools as we thought we might need. The day before us had an almost stimulating airof invitation—through which only a faint undercurrent of the sinister ran. Our rough mountainroad quickly became steep and winding, so that before long our feet ached considerably.
After about two miles we left the road—crossing a stone wall on our rightnear a great elm and striking off diagonally toward a steeper slope according to the chart anddirections which Jackson had prepared for us. It was rough and briery travelling, but we knewthat the cave could not be far off. In the end we came upon the aperture quite suddenly—ablack, bush-grown crevice where the ground shot abruptly upward, and beside it, near a shallowrock pool, a small, still figure stood rigid—as if rivalling its own uncanny petrification.
It was a grey dog—or a dog’s statue—and as our simultaneousgasp died away we scarcely knew what to think. Jackson had exaggerated nothing, and we couldnot believe that any sculptor’s hand had succeeded in producing such perfection. Everyhair of the animal’s magnificent coat seemed distinct, and those on the back were bristledup as if some unknown thing had taken him unaware. Ben, at last half-kindly touching the delicatestony fur, gave vent to an exclamation.
“Good God, Jack, but this can’t be any statue! Look at it—allthe little details, and the way the hair lies! None of Wheeler’s technique here! This isa real dog—though heaven only knows how he ever got in this state. Just like stone—feelfor yourself. Do you suppose there’s any strange gas that sometimes comes out of the caveand does this to animal life? We ought to have looked more into the local legends. And if thisis a real dog—or was a real dog—then that man inside must be the real thing too.”
It was with a good deal of genuine solemnity—almost dread—that wefinally crawled on hands and knees through the cave-mouth, Ben leading. The narrowness lookedhardly three feet, after which the grotto expanded in every direction to form a damp, twilightchamber floored with rubble and detritus. For a time we could make out very little, but as werose to our feet and strained our eyes we began slowly to descry a recumbent figure amidst thegreater darkness ahead. Ben fumbled with his flashlight, but hesitated for a moment before turningit on the prostrate figure. We had little doubt that the stony thing was what had once beena man, and something in the thought unnerved us both.
When Ben at last sent forth the electric beam we saw that the object lay onits side, back toward us. It was clearly of the same material as the dog outside, but was dressedin the mouldering and unpetrified remains of rough sport clothing. Braced as we were for a shock,we approached quite calmly to examine the thing; Ben going around to the other side to glimpsethe averted face. Neither could possibly have been prepared for what Ben saw when he flashedthe light on those stony features. His cry was wholly excusable, and I could not help echoingit as I leaped to his side and shared the sight. Yet it was nothing hideous or intrinsicallyterrifying. It was merely a matter of recognition, for beyond the least shadow of a doubt thischilly rock figure with its half-frightened, half-bitter expression had at one time been ourold acquaintance, Arthur Wheeler.
Some instinct sent us staggering and crawling out of the cave, and down thetangled slope to a point whence we could not see the ominous stone dog. We hardly knew whatto think, for our brains were churning with conjectures and apprehensions. Ben, who had knownWheeler well, was especially upset; and seemed to be piecing together some threads I had overlooked.
Again and again as we paused on the green slope he repeated “Poor Arthur,poor Arthur!” but not till he muttered the name “Mad Dan” did I recall the troubleinto which, according to old Sam Poole, Wheeler had run just before his disappearance. Mad Dan,Ben implied, would doubtless be glad to see what had happened. For a moment it flashed overboth of us that the jealous host might have been responsible for the sculptor’s presencein this evil cave, but the thought went as quickly as it came.
The thing that puzzled us most was to account for the phenomenon itself. Whatgaseous emanation or mineral vapour could have wrought this change in so relatively short atime was utterly beyond us. Normal petrification, we know, is a slow chemical replacement processrequiring vast ages for completion; yet here were two stone images which had been living things—orat least Wheeler had—only a few weeks before. Conjecture was useless. Clearly, nothingremained but to notify the authorities and let them guess what they might; and yet at the backof Ben’s head that notion about Mad Dan still persisted. Anyhow, we clawed our way backto the road, but Ben did not turn toward the village, but looked along upward toward where oldSam had said Dan’s cabin lay. It was the second house from the village, the ancient loaferhad wheezed, and lay on the left far back from the road in a thick copse of scrub oaks. BeforeI knew it Ben was dragging me up the sandy highway past a dingy farmstead and into a regionof increasing wildness.
It did not occur to me to protest, but I felt a certain sense of mounting menaceas the familiar marks of agriculture and civilisation grew fewer and fewer. At last the beginningof a narrow, neglected path opened up on our left, while the peaked roof of a squalid, unpaintedbuilding shewed itself beyond a sickly growth of half-dead trees. This, I knew, must be MadDan’s cabin; and I wondered that Wheeler had ever chosen so unprepossessing a place forhis headquarters. I dreaded to walk up that weedy, uninviting path, but could not lag behindwhen Ben strode determinedly along and began a vigorous rapping at the rickety, musty-smellingdoor.
There was no response to the knock, and something in its echoes sent a seriesof shivers through one. Ben, however, was quite unperturbed; and at once began to circle thehouse in quest of unlocked windows. The third that he tried—in the rear of the dismal cabin—provedcapable of opening, and after a boost and a vigorous spring he was safely inside and helpingme after him.
The room in which we landed was full of limestone and granite blocks, chisellingtools and clay models, and we realised at once that it was Wheeler’s erstwhile studio.So far we had not met with any sign of life, but over everything hovered a damnably ominousdusty odour. On our left was an open door evidently leading to a kitchen on the chimney sideof the house, and through this Ben started, intent on finding anything he could concerning hisfriend’s last habitat. He was considerably ahead of me when he crossed the threshold, sothat I could not see at first what brought him up short and wrung a low cry of horror from hislips.
In another moment, though, I did see—and repeated his cry as instinctivelyas I had done in the cave. For here in this cabin—far from any subterranean depths whichcould breed strange gases and work strange mutations—were two stony figures which I knewat once were no products of Arthur Wheeler’s chisel. In a rude armchair before the fireplace,bound in position by the lash of a long rawhide whip, was the form of a man—unkempt, elderly,and with a look of fathomless horror on its evil, petrified face.
On the floor beside it lay a woman’s figure; graceful, and with a facebetokening considerable youth and beauty. Its expression seemed to be one of sardonic satisfaction,and near its outflung right hand was a large tin pail, somewhat stained on the inside, as witha darkish sediment.
We made no move to approach those inexplicably petrified bodies, nor did weexchange any but the simplest conjectures. That this stony couple had been Mad Dan and his wifewe could not well doubt, but how to account for their present condition was another matter.As we looked horrifiedly around we saw the suddenness with which the final development musthave come—for everything about us seemed, despite a heavy coating of dust, to have beenleft in the midst of commonplace household activities.
The only exception to this rule of casualness was on the kitchen table; inwhose cleared centre, as if to attract attention, lay a thin, battered, blank-book weighteddown by a sizeable tin funnel. Crossing to read the thing, Ben saw that it was a kind of diaryor set of dated entries, written in a somewhat cramped and none too practiced hand. The veryfirst words riveted my attention, and before ten seconds had elapsed he was breathlessly devouringthe halting text—I avidly following as I peered over his shoulder. As we read on—movingas we did so into the less loathsome atmosphere of the adjoining room—many obscure thingsbecame terribly clear to us, and we trembled with a mixture of complex emotions.
This is what we read—and what the coroner read later on. The public hasseen a highly twisted and sensationalised version in the cheap newspapers, but not even thathas more than a fraction of the genuine terror which the simple original held for us as we puzzledit out alone in that musty cabin among the wild hills, with two monstrous stone abnormalitieslurking in the death-like silence of the next room. When we had finished Ben pocketed the bookwith a gesture half of repulsion, and his first words were “Let’s get out of here.”
Silently and nervously we stumbled to the front of the house, unlocked thedoor, and began the long tramp back to the village. There were many statements to make and questionsto answer in the days that followed, and I do not think that either Ben or I can ever shakeoff the effects of the whole harrowing experience. Neither can some of the local authoritiesand city reporters who flocked around—even though they burned a certain book and many papersfound in attic boxes, and destroyed considerable apparatus in the deepest part of that sinisterhillside cave. But here is the text itself:
“Nov. 5—My name is Daniel Morris. Around here they call me ‘MadDan’ because I believe in powers that nobody else believes in nowadays. When I go up onThunder Hill to keep the Feast of the Foxes they think I am crazy—all except the back countryfolks that are afraid of me. They try to stop me from sacrificing the Black Goat at Hallow Eve,and always prevent my doing the Great Rite that would open the gate. They ought to know better,for they know I am a Van Kauran on my mother’s side, and anybody this side of the Hudsoncan tell what the Van Kaurans have handed down. We come from Nicholas Van Kauran, the wizard,who was hanged in Wijtgaart in 1587, and everybody knows he had made the bargain with the BlackMan.
“The soldiers never got his Book of Eibon when they burned hishouse, and his grandson, William Van Kauran, brought it over when he came to Rensselaerwyckand later crossed the river to Esopus. Ask anybody in Kingston or Hurley about what the WilliamVan Kauran line could do to people that got in their way. Also, ask them if my Uncle Hendrikdidn’t manage to keep hold of the Book of Eibon when they ran him out of town andhe went up the river to this place with his family.
“I am writing this—and am going to keep writing this—becauseI want people to know the truth after I am gone. Also, I am afraid I shall really go mad ifI don’t set things down in plain black and white. Everything is going against me, and ifit keeps up I shall have to use the secrets in the Book and call in certain Powers. Threemonths ago that sculptor Arthur Wheeler came to Mountain Top, and they sent him up to me becauseI am the only man in the place who knows anything except farming, hunting, and fleecing summerboarders. The fellow seemed to be interested in what I had to say, and made a deal to stop herefor $13.00 a week with meals. I gave him the back room beside the kitchen for his lumps of stoneand his chiselling, and arranged with Nate Williams to tend to his rock blasting and haul hisbig pieces with a drag and yoke of oxen.
“That was three months ago. Now I know why that cursed son of hell tookso quick to the place. It wasn’t my talk at all, but the looks of my wife Rose, that isOsborne Chandler’s oldest girl. She is sixteen years younger than I am, and is always castingsheep’s eyes at the fellows in town. But we always managed to get along fine enough tillthis dirty rat shewed up, even if she did balk at helping me with the Rites on Roodmas and Hallowmass.I can see now that Wheeler is working on her feelings and getting her so fond of him that shehardly looks at me, and I suppose he’ll try to elope with her sooner or later.
“But he works slow like all sly, polished dogs, and I’ve got plentyof time to think up what to do about it. They don’t either of them know I suspect anything,but before long they’ll both realise it doesn’t pay to break up a Van Kauran’shome. I promise them plenty of novelty in what I’ll do.
“Nov. 25—Thanksgiving Day! That’s a pretty good joke! But atthat I’ll have something to be thankful for when I finish what I’ve started. No questionbut that Wheeler is trying to steal my wife. For the time being, though, I’ll let him keepon being a star boarder. Got the Book of Eibon down from Uncle Hendrik’s old trunkin the attic last week, and am looking up something good which won’t require sacrificesthat I can’t make around here. I want something that’ll finish these two sneakingtraitors, and at the same time get me into no trouble. If it has a twist of drama in it, somuch the better. I’ve thought of calling in the emanation of Yoth, but that needs a child’sblood and I must be careful about the neighbours. The Green Decay looks promising, but thatwould be a bit unpleasant for me as well as for them. I don’t like certain sights and smells.
“Dec. 10—Eureka! I’ve got the very thing at last!Revenge is sweet—and this is the perfect climax! Wheeler, the sculptor—this is toogood! Yes, indeed, that damned sneak is going to produce a statue that will sell quicker thanany of the things he’s been carving these past weeks! A realist, eh? Well—the newstatuary won’t lack any realism! I found the formula in a manuscript insert opposite page679 of the Book. From the handwriting I judge it was put there by my great-grandfatherBareut Picterse Van Kauran—the one who disappeared from New Paltz in 1839. Iä!Shub-Niggurath! The Goat with a Thousand Young!
“To be plain, I’ve found a way to turn those wretched rats into stonestatues. It’s absurdly simple, and really depends more on plain chemistry than on the OuterPowers. If I can get hold of the right stuff I can brew a drink that’ll pass for home-madewine, and one swig ought to finish any ordinary being short of an elephant. What it amountsto is a kind of petrification infinitely speeded up. Shoots the whole system full of calciumand barium salts and replaces living cells with mineral matter so fast that nothing can stopit. It must have been one of those things great-grandfather got at the Great Sabbat on Sugar-Loafin the Catskills. Queer things used to go on there. Seems to me I heard of a man in New Paltz—SquireHasbrouck—turned to stone or something like that in 1834. He was an enemy of the Van Kaurans.First thing I must do is order the five chemicals I need from Albany and Montreal. Plenty oftime later to experiment. When everything is over I’ll round up all the statues and sellthem as Wheeler’s work to pay for his overdue board bill! He always was a realist and anegoist—wouldn’t it be natural for him to make a self-portrait in stone, and to usemy wife for another model—as indeed he’s really been doing for the past fortnight?Trust the dull public not to ask what quarry the queer stone came from!
“Dec. 25—Christmas. Peace on earth, and so forth! These two swineare goggling at each other as if I didn’t exist. They must think I’m deaf, dumb, andblind! Well, the barium sulphate and calcium chloride came from Albany last Thursday, and theacids, catalytics, and instruments are due from Montreal any day now. The mills of the gods—andall that! I’ll do the work in Allen’s Cave near the lower wood lot, and at the sametime will be openly making some wine in the cellar here. There ought to be some excuse for offeringa new drink—though it won’t take much planning to fool those moonstruck nincompoops.The trouble will be to make Rose take wine, for she pretends not to like it. Any experimentsthat I make on animals will be down at the cave, and nobody ever thinks of going there in winter.I’ll do some wood-cutting to account for my time away. A small load or two brought in willkeep him off the track.
“Jan. 20—It’s harder work than I thought. A lot depends on theexact proportions. The stuff came from Montreal, but I had to send again for some better scalesand an acetylene lamp. They’re getting curious down at the village. Wish the express officeweren’t in Steenwyck’s store. Am trying various mixtures on the sparrows that drinkand bathe in the pool in front of the cave—when it’s melted. Sometimes it kills them,but sometimes they fly away. Clearly, I’ve missed some important reaction. I suppose Roseand that upstart are making the most of my absence—but I can afford to let them. Therecan be no doubt of my success in the end.
“Feb. 11—Have got it at last! Put a fresh lot in the littlepool—which is well melted today—and the first bird that drank toppled over as if hewere shot. I picked him up a second later, and he was a perfect piece of stone, down to thesmallest claws and feather. Not a muscle changed since he was poised for drinking, so he must havedied the instant any of the stuff got to his stomach. I didn’t expect the petrification tocome so soon. But a sparrow isn’t a fair test of the way the thing would act with a largeanimal. I must get something bigger to try it on, for it must be the right strength when I give itto those swine. I guess Rose’s dog Rex will do. I’ll take him along the next time andsay a timber wolf got him. She thinks a lot of him, and I shan’t be sorry to give hersomething to sniffle over before the big reckoning. I must be careful where I keep this book. Rosesometimes pries around in the queerest places.
“Feb. 15—Getting warm! Tried it on Rex and it worked like a charmwith only double the strength. I fixed the rock pool and got him to drink. He seemed to knowsomething queer had hit him, for he bristled and growled, but he was a piece of stone beforehe could turn his head. The solution ought to have been stronger, and for a human being oughtto be very much stronger. I think I’m getting the hang of it now, and am about ready forthat cur Wheeler. The stuff seems to be tasteless, but to make sure I’ll flavour it withthe new wine I’m making up at the house. Wish I were surer about the tastelessness, soI could give it to Rose in water without trying to urge wine on her. I’ll get the two separately—Wheelerout here and Rose at home. Have just fixed a strong solution and cleared away all strange objectsin front of the cave. Rose whimpered like a puppy when I told her a wolf had got Rex, and Wheelergurgled a lot of sympathy.
“March 1—Iä R’lyeh! Praise the Lord Tsathoggua!I’ve got the son of hell at last! Told him I’d found a new ledge of friable limestonedown this way, and he trotted after me like the yellow cur he is! I had the wine-flavoured stuffin a bottle on my hip, and he was glad of a swig when we got here. Gulped it down without awink—and dropped in his tracks before you could count three. But he knows I’ve hadmy vengeance, for I made a face at him that he couldn’t miss. I saw the look of understandingcome into his face as he keeled over. In two minutes he was solid stone.
“I dragged him into the cave and put Rex’s figure outside again.That bristling dog shape will help to scare people off. It’s getting time for the springhunters, and besides, there’s a damned ‘lunger’ named Jackson in a cabin overthe hill who does a lot of snooping around in the snow. I wouldn’t want my laboratory andstoreroom to be found just yet! When I got home I told Rose that Wheeler had found a telegramat the village summoning him suddenly home. I don’t know whether she believed me or notbut it doesn’t matter. For form’s sake, I packed Wheeler’s things and took themdown the hill, telling her I was going to ship them after him. I put them in the dry well atthe abandoned Rapelye place. Now for Rose!
“March 3—Can’t get Rose to drink any wine. I hope that stuffis tasteless enough to go unnoticed in water. I tried it in tea and coffee, but it forms a precipitateand can’t be used that way. If I use it in water I’ll have to cut down the dose andtrust to a more gradual action. Mr. and Mrs. Hoog dropped in this noon, and I had hard workkeeping the conversation away from Wheeler’s departure. It mustn’t get around thatwe say he was called back to New York when everybody at the village knows no telegram came,and that he didn’t leave on the bus. Rose is acting damned queer about the whole thing.I’ll have to pick a quarrel with her and keep her locked in the attic. The best way isto try to make her drink that doctored wine—and if she does give in, so much better.
“March 7—Have started in on Rose. She wouldn’t drink the wineso I took a whip to her and drove her up in the attic. She’ll never come down alive. Ipass her a platter of salty bread and salt meat, and a pail of slightly doctored water, twicea day. The salt food ought to make her drink a lot, and it can’t be long before the actionsets in. I don’t like the way she shouts about Wheeler when I’m at the door. The restof the time she is absolutely silent.
“March 9—It’s damned peculiar how slow that stuff is in gettinghold of Rose. I’ll have to make it stronger—probably she’ll never taste it withall the salt I’ve been feeding her. Well, if it doesn’t get her there are plenty ofother ways to fall back on. But I would like to carry this neat statue plan through! Went tothe cave this morning and all is well there. I sometimes hear Rose’s steps on the ceilingoverhead, and I think they’re getting more and more dragging. The stuff is certainly working,but it’s too slow. Not strong enough. From now on I’ll rapidly stiffen up the dose.
“March 11—It is very queer. She is still alive and moving. Tuesdaynight I heard her piggling with a window, so went up and gave her a rawhiding. She acts moresullen than frightened, and her eyes look swollen. But she could never drop to the ground fromthat height and there’s nowhere she could climb down. I have had dreams at night, for herslow, dragging pacing on the floor above gets on my nerves. Sometimes I think she works at thelock on the door.
“March 15—Still alive, despite all the strengthening of the dose.There’s something queer about it. She crawls now, and doesn’t pace very often. Butthe sound of her crawling is horrible. She rattles the windows, too, and fumbles with the door.I shall have to finish her off with the rawhide if this keeps up. I’m getting very sleepy.Wonder if Rose has got on her guard somehow. But she must be drinking the stuff. This sleepinessis abnormal—I think the strain is telling on me. I’m sleepy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
(Here the cramped handwriting trails out in a vague scrawl, giving place toa note in a firmer, evidently feminine handwriting, indicative of great emotional tension.)
“March 16—4 a.m.—This is added by Rose C. Morris, about todie. Please notify my father, Osborne E. Chandler, Route 2, Mountain Top, N.Y. I have just readwhat the beast has written. I felt sure he had killed Arthur Wheeler, but did not know how tillI read this terrible notebook. Now I know what I escaped. I noticed the water tasted queer,so took none of it after the first sip. I threw it all out of the window. That one sip has halfparalysed me, but I can still get about. The thirst was terrible, but I ate as little as possibleof the salty food and was able to get a little water by setting some old pans and dishes thatwere up here under places where the roof leaked.
“There were two great rains. I thought he was trying to poison me, thoughI didn’t know what the poison was like. What he has written about himself and me is a lie.We were never happy together and I think I married him only under one of those spells that hewas able to lay on people. I guess he hypnotised both my father and me, for he was always hatedand feared and suspected of dark dealings with the devil. My father once called him The Devil’sKin, and he was right.
“No one will ever know what I went through as his wife. It was not simplycommon cruelty—though God knows he was cruel enough, and beat me often with a leather whip.It was more—more than anyone in this age can ever understand. He was a monstrous creature,and practiced all sorts of hellish ceremonies handed down by his mother’s people. He triedto make me help in the rites—and I don’t dare even hint what they were. I would not,so he beat me. It would be blasphemy to tell what he tried to make me do. I can say he was amurderer even then, for I know what he sacrificed one night on Thunder Hill. He was surely theDevil’s Kin. I tried four times to run away, but he always caught and beat me. Also, hehad a sort of hold over my mind, and even over my father’s mind.
“About Arthur Wheeler I have nothing to be ashamed of. We did come tolove each other, but only in an honourable way. He gave me the first kind treatment I had everhad since leaving my father’s, and meant to help me get out of the clutches of that fiend.He had several talks with my father, and was going to help me get out west. After my divorcewe would have been married.
“Ever since that brute locked me in the attic I have planned to get outand finish him. I always kept the poison overnight in case I could escape and find him asleepand give it to him somehow. At first he waked easily when I worked on the lock of the door andtested the conditions at the windows, but later he began to get more tired and sleep sounder.I could always tell by his snoring when he was asleep.
“Tonight he was so fast asleep I forced the lock without waking him. Itwas hard work getting downstairs with my partial paralysis, but I did. I found him here withthe lamp burning—asleep at the table, where he had been writing in this book. In the cornerwas the long rawhide whip he had so often beaten me with. I used it to tie him to the chairso he could not move a muscle. I lashed his neck so that I could pour anything down his throatwithout his resisting.
“He waked up just as I was finishing and I guess he saw right off thathe was done for. He shouted frightful things and tried to chant mystical formulas, but I chokedhim off with a dish towel from the sink. Then I saw this book he had been writing in, and stoppedto read it. The shock was terrible, and I almost fainted four or five times. My mind was notready for such things. After that I talked to that fiend for two or three hours steady. I toldhim everything I had wanted to tell him through all the years I had been his slave, and a lotof other things that had to do with what I had read in this awful book.
“He looked almost purple when I was through, and I think he was half delirious.Then I got a funnel from the cupboard and jammed it into his mouth after taking out the gag.He knew what I was going to do, but was helpless. I had brought down the pail of poisoned water,and without a qualm, I poured a good half of it into the funnel.
“It must have been a very strong dose, for almost at once I saw that brutebegin to stiffen and turn a dull stony grey. In ten minutes I knew he was solid stone. I couldnot bear to touch him, but the tin funnel clinked horribly when I pulled it out of hismouth. I wish I could have given that Kin of the Devil a more painful, lingering death, butsurely this was the most appropriate he could have had.
“There is not much more to say. I am half-paralysed, and with Arthur murderedI have nothing to live for. I shall make things complete by drinking the rest of the poisonafter placing this book where it will be found. In a quarter of an hour I shall be a stone statue.My only wish is to be buried beside the statue that was Arthur—when it is found in thatcave where the fiend left it. Poor trusting Rex ought to lie at our feet. I do not care whatbecomes of the stone devil tied in the chair.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
