Three times Randolph Carter dreamed of the marvellous city, and three times was he snatchedaway while still he paused on the high terrace above it. All golden and lovely it blazed inthe sunset, with walls, temples, colonnades, and arched bridges of veined marble, silver-basinedfountains of prismatic spray in broad squares and perfumed gardens, and wide streets marchingbetween delicate trees and blossom-laden urns and ivory statues in gleaming rows; while on steepnorthward slopes climbed tiers of red roofs and old peaked gables harbouring little lanes ofgrassy cobbles. It was a fever of the gods; a fanfare of supernal trumpets and a clash of immortalcymbals. Mystery hung about it as clouds about a fabulous unvisited mountain; and as Carterstood breathless and expectant on that balustraded parapet there swept up to him the poignancyand suspense of almost-vanished memory, the pain of lost things, and the maddening need to placeagain what once had an awesome and momentous place.
He knew that for him its meaning must once have been supreme; though in whatcycle or incarnation he had known it, or whether in dream or in waking, he could not tell. Vaguelyit called up glimpses of a far, forgotten first youth, when wonder and pleasure lay in all themystery of days, and dawn and dusk alike strode forth prophetick to the eager sound of lutesand song; unclosing faery gates toward further and surprising marvels. But each night as hestood on that high marble terrace with the curious urns and carven rail and looked off overthat hushed sunset city of beauty and unearthly immanence, he felt the bondage of dream’styrannous gods; for in no wise could he leave that lofty spot, or descend the wide marmorealflights flung endlessly down to where those streets of elder witchery lay outspread and beckoning.
When for the third time he awaked with those flights still undescended andthose hushed sunset streets still untraversed, he prayed long and earnestly to the hidden godsof dream that brood capricious above the clouds on unknown Kadath, in the cold waste where noman treads. But the gods made no answer and shewed no relenting, nor did they give any favouringsign when he prayed to them in dream, and invoked them sacrificially through the bearded priestsNasht and Kaman-Thah, whose cavern-temple with its pillar of flame lies not far from the gatesof the waking world. It seemed, however, that his prayers must have been adversely heard, forafter even the first of them he ceased wholly to behold the marvellous city; as if his threeglimpses from afar had been mere accidents or oversights, and against some hidden plan or wishof the gods.
At length, sick with longing for those glittering sunset streets and crypticalhill lanes among ancient tiled roofs, nor able sleeping or waking to drive them from his mind,Carter resolved to go with bold entreaty whither no man had gone before, and dare the icy desertsthrough the dark to where unknown Kadath, veiled in cloud and crowned with unimagined stars,holds secret and nocturnal the onyx castle of the Great Ones.
In light slumber he descended the seventy steps to the cavern of flame andtalked of this design to the bearded priests Nasht and Kaman-Thah. And the priests shook theirpshent-bearing heads and vowed it would be the death of his soul. They pointed out that theGreat Ones had shewn already their wish, and that it is not agreeable to them to be harassedby insistent pleas. They reminded him, too, that not only had no man ever been to unknown Kadath,but no man had ever suspected in what part of space it may lie; whether it be in the dreamlandsaround our world, or in those surrounding some unguessed companion of Fomalhaut or Aldebaran.If in our dreamland, it might conceivably be reached; but only three fully human souls sincetime began had ever crossed and recrossed the black impious gulfs to other dreamlands, andof that three two had come back quite mad. There were, in such voyages, incalculable local dangers;as well as that shocking final peril which gibbers unmentionably outside the ordered universe,where no dreams reach; that last amorphous blight of nethermost confusion which blasphemes andbubbles at the centre of all infinity—the boundless daemon-sultan Azathoth, whose nameno lips dare speak aloud, and who gnaws hungrily in inconceivable, unlighted chambers beyondtime amidst the muffled, maddening beating of vile drums and the thin, monotonous whine of accursedflutes; to which detestable pounding and piping dance slowly, awkwardly, and absurdly the giganticultimate gods, the blind, voiceless, tenebrous, mindless Other Gods whose soul and messengeris the crawling chaos Nyarlathotep.
Of these things was Carter warned by the priests Nasht and Kaman-Thah in thecavern of flame, but still he resolved to find the gods on unknown Kadath in the cold waste,wherever that might be, and to win from them the sight and remembrance and shelter of the marvelloussunset city. He knew that his journey would be strange and long, and that the Great Ones wouldbe against it; but being old in the land of dream he counted on many useful memories and devicesto aid him. So asking a farewell blessing of the priests and thinking shrewdly on his course,he boldly descended the seven hundred steps to the Gate of Deeper Slumber and set out throughthe enchanted wood.
In the tunnels of that twisted wood, whose low prodigious oaks twine gropingboughs and shine dim with the phosphorescence of strange fungi, dwell the furtive and secretivezoogs; who know many obscure secrets of the dream-world and a few of the waking world, sincethe wood at two places touches the lands of men, though it would be disastrous to say where.Certain unexplained rumours, events, and vanishments occur among men where the zoogs have access,and it is well that they cannot travel far outside the world of dream. But over the nearer partsof the dream-world they pass freely, flitting small and brown and unseen and bearing back piquanttales to beguile the hours around their hearths in the forest they love. Most of them live inburrows, but some inhabit the trunks of the great trees; and although they live mostly on fungiit is muttered that they have also a slight taste for meat, either physical or spiritual, forcertainly many dreamers have entered that wood who have not come out. Carter, however, had nofear; for he was an old dreamer and had learnt their fluttering language and made many a treatywith them; having found through their help the splendid city of Celephaïs in Ooth-Nargaibeyond the Tanarian Hills, where reigns half the year the great King Kuranes, a man he had knownby another name in life. Kuranes was the one soul who had been to the star-gulfs and returnedfree from madness.
Threading now the low phosphorescent aisles between those gigantic trunks,Carter made fluttering sounds in the manner of the zoogs, and listened now and then for responses.He remembered one particular village of the creatures near the centre of the wood, where a circleof great mossy stones in what was once a clearing tells of older and more terrible dwellerslong forgotten, and toward this spot he hastened. He traced his way by the grotesque fungi,which always seem better nourished as one approaches the dread circle where elder beings dancedand sacrificed. Finally the greater light of those thicker fungi revealed a sinister green andgrey vastness pushing up through the roof of the forest and out of sight. This was the nearestof the great ring of stones, and Carter knew he was close to the zoog village. Renewing hisfluttering sound, he waited patiently; and was at length rewarded by an impression of many eyeswatching him. It was the zoogs, for one sees their weird eyes long before one can discern theirsmall, slippery brown outlines.
Out they swarmed, from hidden burrow and honeycombed tree, till the whole dim-littenregion was alive with them. Some of the wilder ones brushed Carter unpleasantly, and one evennipped loathsomely at his ear; but these lawless spirits were soon restrained by their elders.The Council of Sages, recognising the visitor, offered a gourd of fermented sap from a hauntedtree unlike the others, which had grown from a seed dropt down by someone on the moon; and asCarter drank it ceremoniously a very strange colloquy began. The zoogs did not, unfortunately,know where the peak of Kadath lies, nor could they even say whether the cold waste is in ourdream-world or in another. Rumours of the Great Ones came equally from all points; and one mightonly say that they were likelier to be seen on high mountain peaks than in valleys, since onsuch peaks they dance reminiscently when the moon is above and the clouds beneath.
Then one very ancient zoog recalled a thing unheard-of by the others; and saidthat in Ulthar, beyond the river Skai, there still lingered the last copy of those inconceivablyold Pnakotic Manuscripts made by waking men in forgotten boreal kingdoms and borne into theland of dreams when the hairy cannibal Gnophkehs overcame many-templed Olathoë and slewall the heroes of the land of Lomar. Those manuscripts, he said, told much of the gods; andbesides, in Ulthar there were men who had seen the signs of the gods, and even one old priestwho had scaled a great mountain to behold them dancing by moonlight. He had failed, though hiscompanion had succeeded and perished namelessly.
So Randolph Carter thanked the zoogs, who fluttered amicably and gave him anothergourd of moon-tree wine to take with him, and set out through the phosphorescent wood for theother side, where the rushing Skai flows down from the slopes of Lerion, and Hatheg and Nirand Ulthar dot the plain. Behind him, furtive and unseen, crept several of the curious zoogs;for they wished to learn what might befall him, and bear back the legend to their people. Thevast oaks grew thicker as he pushed on beyond the village, and he looked sharply for a certainspot where they would thin somewhat, standing quite dead or dying among the unnaturally densefungi and the rotting mould and mushy logs of their fallen brothers. There he would turn sharplyaside, for at that spot a mighty slab of stone rests on the forest floor; and those who havedared approach it say that it bears an iron ring three feet wide. Remembering the archaic circleof great mossy rocks, and what it was possibly set up for, the zoogs do not pause near thatexpansive slab with its huge ring; for they realise that all which is forgotten need not necessarilybe dead, and they would not like to see the slab rise slowly and deliberately.
Carter detoured at the proper place, and heard behind him the frightened flutteringof some of the more timid zoogs. He had known they would follow him, so he was not disturbed;for one grows accustomed to the anomalies of these prying creatures. It was twilight when hecame to the edge of the wood, and the strengthening glow told him it was the twilight of morning.Over fertile plains rolling down to the Skai he saw the smoke of cottage chimneys, and on everyhand were the hedges and ploughed fields and thatched roofs of a peaceful land. Once he stoppedat a farmhouse well for a cup of water, and all the dogs barked affrightedly at the inconspicuouszoogs that crept through the grass behind. At another house, where people were stirring, heasked questions about the gods, and whether they danced often upon Lerion; but the farmer andhis wife would only make the Elder Sign and tell him the way to Nir and Ulthar.
At noon he walked through the one broad high street of Nir, which he had oncevisited and which marked his farthest former travels in this direction; and soon afterward hecame to the great stone bridge across the Skai, into whose central pier the masons had sealeda living human sacrifice when they built it thirteen-hundred years before. Once on the otherside, the frequent presence of cats (who all arched their backs at the trailing zoogs) revealedthe near neighbourhood of Ulthar; for in Ulthar, according to an ancient and significant law,no man may kill a cat. Very pleasant were the suburbs of Ulthar, with their little green cottagesand neatly fenced farms; and still pleasanter was the quaint town itself, with its old peakedroofs and overhanging upper stories and numberless chimney-pots and narrow hill streets whereone can see old cobbles whenever the graceful cats afford space enough. Carter, the cats beingsomewhat dispersed by the half-seen zoogs, picked his way directly to the modest Temple of theElder Ones where the priests and old records were said to be; and once within that venerablecircular tower of ivied stone—which crowns Ulthar’s highest hill—he soughtout the patriarch Atal, who had been up the forbidden peak Hatheg-Kla in the stony desert andhad come down again alive.
Atal, seated on an ivory dais in a festooned shrine at the top of the temple,was fully three centuries old; but still very keen of mind and memory. From him Carter learnedmany things about the gods, but mainly that they are indeed only earth’s gods, rulingfeebly our own dreamland and having no power or habitation elsewhere. They might, Atal said,heed a man’s prayer if in good humour; but one must not think of climbing to their onyxstronghold atop Kadath in the cold waste. It was lucky that no man knew where Kadath towers,for the fruits of ascending it would be very grave. Atal’s companion Barzai the Wise hadbeen drawn screaming into the sky for climbing merely the known peak of Hatheg-Kla. With unknownKadath, if ever found, matters would be much worse; for although earth’s gods may sometimesbe surpassed by a wise mortal, they are protected by the Other Gods from Outside, whom it isbetter not to discuss. At least twice in the world’s history the Other Gods set theirseal upon earth’s primal granite; once in antediluvian times, as guessed from a drawingin those parts of the Pnakotic Manuscripts too ancient to be read, and once on Hatheg-Kla whenBarzai the Wise tried to see earth’s gods dancing by moonlight. So, Atal said, it wouldbe much better to let all gods alone except in tactful prayers.
Carter, though disappointed by Atal’s discouraging advice and by themeagre help to be found in the Pnakotic Manuscripts and the Seven Cryptical Books of Hsan, didnot wholly despair. First he questioned the old priest about that marvellous sunset city seenfrom the railed terrace, thinking that perhaps he might find it without the gods’ aid;but Atal could tell him nothing. Probably, Atal said, the place belonged to his especial dream-worldand not to the general land of vision that many know; and conceivably it might be on anotherplanet. In that case earth’s gods could not guide him if they would. But this was notlikely, since the stopping of the dreams shewed pretty clearly that it was something the GreatOnes wished to hide from him.
Then Carter did a wicked thing, offering his guileless host so many draughtsof the moon-wine which the zoogs had given him that the old man became irresponsibly talkative.Robbed of his reserve, poor Atal babbled freely of forbidden things; telling of a great imagereported by travellers as carved on the solid rock of the mountain Ngranek, on the isle of Oriabin the Southern Sea, and hinting that it may be a likeness which earth’s gods once wroughtof their own features in the days when they danced by moonlight on that mountain. And he hiccoughedlikewise that the features of that image are very strange, so that one might easily recognisethem, and that they are sure signs of the authentic race of the gods.
Now the use of all this in finding the gods became at once apparent to Carter.It is known that in disguise the younger among the Great Ones often espouse the daughters ofmen, so that around the borders of the cold waste wherein stands Kadath the peasants must allbear their blood. This being so, the way to find that waste must be to see the stone face onNgranek and mark the features; then, having noted them with care, to search for such featuresamong living men. Where they are plainest and thickest, there must the gods dwell nearest; andwhatever stony waste lies back of the villages in that place must be that wherein stands Kadath.
Much of the Great Ones might be learnt in such regions, and those with theirblood might inherit little memories very useful to a seeker. They might not know their parentage,for the gods so dislike to be known among men that none can be found who has seen their faceswittingly; a thing which Carter realised even as he sought to scale Kadath. But they would havequeer lofty thoughts misunderstood by their fellows, and would sing of far places and gardensso unlike any known even in dreamland that common folk would call them fools; and from all thisone could perhaps learn old secrets of Kadath, or gain hints of the marvellous sunset city whichthe gods held secret. And more, one might in certain cases seize some well-loved child of agod as hostage; or even capture some young god himself, disguised and dwelling amongst men witha comely peasant maiden as his bride.
Atal, however, did not know how to find Ngranek on its isle of Oriab; and recommendedthat Carter follow the singing Skai under its bridges down to the Southern Sea; where no burgessof Ulthar has ever been, but whence the merchants come in boats or with long caravans of mulesand two-wheeled carts. There is a great city there, Dylath-Leen, but in Ulthar its reputationis bad because of the black three-banked galleys that sail to it with rubies from no clearlynamed shore. The traders that come from those galleys to deal with the jewellers are human,or nearly so, but the rowers are never beheld; and it is not thought wholesome in Ulthar thatmerchants should trade with black ships from unknown places whose rowers cannot be exhibited.
By the time he had given this information Atal was very drowsy, and Carterlaid him gently on a couch of inlaid ebony and gathered his long beard decorously on his chest.As he turned to go, he observed that no suppressed fluttering followed him, and wondered whythe zoogs had become so lax in their curious pursuit. Then he noticed all the sleek complacentcats of Ulthar licking their chops with unusual gusto, and recalled the spitting and caterwaulinghe had faintly heard in lower parts of the temple while absorbed in the old priest’s conversation.He recalled, too, the evilly hungry way in which an especially impudent young zoog had regardeda small black kitten in the cobbled street outside. And because he loved nothing on earth morethan small black kittens, he stooped and petted the sleek cats of Ulthar as they licked theirchops, and did not mourn because those inquisitive zoogs would escort him no farther.
It was sunset now, so Carter stopped at an ancient inn on a steep little streetoverlooking the lower town. And as he went out on the balcony of his room and gazed down atthe sea of red tiled roofs and cobbled ways and the pleasant fields beyond, all mellow and magicalin the slanted light, he swore that Ulthar would be a very likely place to dwell in always,were not the memory of a greater sunset city ever goading one on toward unknown perils. Thentwilight fell, and the pink walls of the plastered gables turned violet and mystic, and littleyellow lights floated up one by one from old lattice windows. And sweet bells pealed in thetemple tower above, and the first star winked softly above the meadows across the Skai. Withthe night came song, and Carter nodded as the lutanists praised ancient days from beyond thefiligreed balconies and tessellated courts of simple Ulthar. And there might have been sweetnesseven in the voices of Ulthar’s many cats, but that they were mostly heavy and silent fromstrange feasting. Some of them stole off to those cryptical realms which are known only to catsand which villagers say are on the moon’s dark side, whither the cats leap from tall housetops,but one small black kitten crept upstairs and sprang in Carter’s lap to purr and play,and curled up near his feet when he lay down at last on the little couch whose pillows werestuffed with fragrant, drowsy herbs.
In the morning Carter joined a caravan of merchants bound for Dylath-Leen withthe spun wool of Ulthar and the cabbages of Ulthar’s busy farms. And for six days theyrode with tinkling bells on the smooth road beside the Skai; stopping some nights at the innsof little quaint fishing towns, and on other nights camping under the stars while snatches ofboatmen’s songs came from the placid river. The country was very beautiful, with greenhedges and groves and picturesque peaked cottages and octagonal windmills.
On the seventh day a blur of smoke arose on the horizon ahead, and then thetall black towers of Dylath-Leen, which is built mostly of basalt. Dylath-Leen with its thinangular towers looks in the distance like a bit of the Giants’ Causeway, and its streetsare dark and uninviting. There are many dismal sea-taverns near the myriad wharves, and allthe town is thronged with the strange seamen of every land on earth and of a few which are saidto be not on earth. Carter questioned the oddly robed men of that city about the peak of Ngranekon the isle of Oriab, and found that they knew of it well. Ships came from Baharna on that island,one being due to return thither in only a month, and Ngranek is but two days’ zebra-ridefrom that port. But few had seen the stone face of the god, because it is on a very difficultside of Ngranek, which overlooks only sheer crags and a valley of sinister lava. Once the godswere angered with men on that side, and spoke of the matter to the Other Gods.
It was hard to get this information from the traders and sailors in Dylath-Leen’ssea-taverns, because they mostly preferred to whisper of the black galleys. One of them wasdue in a week with rubies from its unknown shore, and the townsfolk dreaded to see it dock.The mouths of the men who came from it to trade were too wide, and the way their turbans werehumped up in two points above their foreheads was in especially bad taste. And their shoes werethe shortest and queerest ever seen in the Six Kingdoms. But worst of all was the matter ofthe unseen rowers. Those three banks of oars moved too briskly and accurately and vigorouslyto be comfortable, and it was not right for a ship to stay in port for weeks while the merchantstraded, yet to give no glimpse of its crew. It was not fair to the tavern-keepers of Dylath-Leen,or to the grocers and butchers, either; for not a scrap of provisions was ever sent aboard.The merchants took only gold and stout black slaves from Parg across the river. That was allthey ever took, those unpleasantly featured merchants and their unseen rowers; never anythingfrom the butchers and grocers, but only gold and the fat black men of Parg whom they boughtby the pound. And the odours from those galleys which the south wind blew in from the wharvesare not to be described. Only by constantly smoking strong thagweed could even the hardiest denizenof the old sea-taverns bear them. Dylath-Leen would never have tolerated the black galleys hadsuch rubies been obtainable elsewhere, but no mine in all earth’s dreamland was knownto produce their like.
Of these things Dylath-Leen’s cosmopolitan folk chiefly gossiped whilstCarter waited patiently for the ship from Baharna, which might bear him to the isle whereoncarven Ngranek towers lofty and barren. Meanwhile he did not fail to seek through the hauntsof far travellers for any tales they might have concerning Kadath in the cold waste or a marvellouscity of marble walls and silver fountains seen below terraces in the sunset. Of these things,however, he learned nothing; though he once thought that a certain old slant-eyed merchant lookedqueerly intelligent when the cold waste was spoken of. This man was reputed to trade with thehorrible stone villages on the icy desert plateau of Leng, which no healthy folk visit and whoseevil fires are seen at night from afar. He was even rumoured to have dealt with that high-priestnot to be described, which wears a yellow silken mask over its face and dwells all alone ina prehistoric stone monastery. That such a person might well have had nibbling traffick withsuch beings as may conceivably dwell in the cold waste was not to be doubted, but Carter soonfound that it was no use questioning him.
Then the black galley slipped into the harbour past the basalt mole and thetall lighthouse, silent and alien, and with a strange stench that the south wind drove intothe town. Uneasiness rustled through the taverns along that waterfront, and after a while thedark wide-mouthed merchants with humped turbans and short feet clumped stealthily ashore toseek the bazaars of the jewellers. Carter observed them closely, and disliked them more thelonger he looked at them. Then he saw them drive the stout black men of Parg up the gangplankgrunting and sweating into that singular galley, and wondered in what lands—or if in anylands at all—those fat pathetic creatures might be destined to serve.
And on the third evening of that galley’s stay one of the uncomfortablemerchants spoke to him, smirking sinfully and hinting of what he had heard in the taverns ofCarter’s quest. He appeared to have knowledge too secret for public telling; and thoughthe sound of his voice was unbearably hateful, Carter felt that the lore of so far a travellermust not be overlooked. He bade him therefore be his own guest in locked chambers above, anddrew out the last of the zoogs’ moon-wine to loosen his tongue. The strange merchant drankheavily, but smirked unchanged by the draught. Then he drew forth a curious bottle with wineof his own, and Carter saw that the bottle was a single hollowed ruby, grotesquely carved inpatterns too fabulous to be comprehended. He offered his wine to his host, and though Cartertook only the least sip, he felt the dizziness of space and the fever of unimagined jungles.All the while the guest had been smiling more and more broadly, and as Carter slipped into blanknessthe last thing he saw was that dark odious face convulsed with evil laughter, and somethingquite unspeakable where one of the two frontal puffs of that orange turban had become disarrangedwith the shakings of that epileptic mirth.
Carter next had consciousness amidst horrible odours beneath a tent-like awningon the deck of a ship, with the marvellous coasts of the Southern Sea flying by in unnaturalswiftness. He was not chained, but three of the dark sardonic merchants stood grinning nearby,and the sight of those humps in their turbans made him almost as faint as did the stench thatfiltered up through the sinister hatches. He saw slip past him the glorious lands and citiesof which a fellow-dreamer of earth—a lighthouse-keeper in ancient Kingsport—hadoften discoursed in the old days, and recognised the templed terraces of Zar, abode of forgottendreams; the spires of infamous Thalarion, that daemon-city of a thousand wonders where the eidolonLathi reigns; the charnal gardens of Xura, land of pleasures unattained, and the twin headlandsof crystal, meeting above in a resplendent arch, which guard the harbour of Sona-Nyl, blessedland of fancy.
Past all these gorgeous lands the malodorous ship flew unwholesomely, urgedby the abnormal strokes of those unseen rowers below. And before the day was done Carter sawthat the steersman could have no other goal than the Basalt Pillars of the West, beyond whichsimple folk say splendid Cathuria lies, but which wise dreamers well know are the gates of amonstrous cataract wherein the oceans of earth’s dreamland drop wholly to abysmal nothingnessand shoot through the empty spaces toward other worlds and other stars and the awful voids outsidethe ordered universe where the daemon-sultan Azathoth gnaws hungrily in chaos amid poundingand piping and the hellish dancing of the Other Gods, blind, voiceless, tenebrous, and mindless,with their soul and messenger Nyarlathotep.
Meanwhile the three sardonic merchants would give no word of their intent,though Carter well knew that they must be leagued with those who wished to hold him from hisquest. It is understood in the land of dream that the Other Gods have many agents moving amongmen; and all these agents, whether wholly human or slightly less than human, are eager to workthe will of those blind and mindless things in return for the favour of their hideous soul andmessenger, the crawling chaos Nyarlathotep. So Carter inferred that the merchants of the humpedturbans, hearing of his daring search for the Great Ones in their castle on Kadath, had decidedto take him away and deliver him to Nyarlathothep for whatever nameless bounty might be offeredfor such a prize. What might be the land of those merchants, in our known universe or in theeldritch spaces outside, Carter could not guess; nor could he imagine at what hellish trysting-placethey would meet the crawling chaos to give him up and claim their reward. He knew, however,that no beings as nearly human as these would dare approach the ultimate nighted throne of thedaemon Azathoth in the formless central void.
At the set of sun the merchants licked their excessively wide lips and glaredhungrily, and one of them went below and returned from some hidden and offensive cabin witha pot and basket of plates. Then they squatted close together beneath the awning and ate thesmoking meat that was passed around. But when they gave Carter a portion, he found somethingvery terrible in the size and shape of it; so that he turned even paler than before and castthat portion into the sea when no eye was on him. And again he thought of those unseen rowersbeneath, and of the suspicious nourishment from which their far too mechanical strength wasderived.
It was dark when the galley passed betwixt the Basalt Pillars of the West andthe sound of the ultimate cataract swelled portentous from ahead. And the spray of that cataractrose to obscure the stars, and the deck grew damp, and the vessel reeled in the surging currentof the brink. Then with a queer whistle and plunge the leap was taken, and Carter felt the terrorsof nightmare as earth fell away and the great boat shot silent and comet-like into planetaryspace. Never before had he known what shapeless black things lurk and caper and flounder allthrough the aether, leering and grinning at such voyagers as may pass, and sometimes feelingabout with slimy paws when some moving object excites their curiosity. These are the namelesslarvae of the Other Gods, and like them are blind and without mind, and possessed of singularhungers and thirsts.
But that offensive galley did not aim as far as Carter had feared, for he soonsaw that the helmsman was steering a course directly for the moon. The moon was a crescent,shining larger and larger as they approached it, and shewing its singular craters and peaksuncomfortably. The ship made for the edge, and it soon became clear that its destination wasthat secret and mysterious side which is always turned away from the earth, and which no fullyhuman person, save perhaps the dreamer Snireth-Ko, has ever beheld. The close aspect of themoon as the galley drew near proved very disturbing to Carter, and he did not like the sizeand shape of the ruins which crumbled here and there. The dead temples on the mountains wereso placed that they could have glorified no wholesome or suitable gods, and in the symmetriesof the broken columns there seemed to lurk some dark and inner meaning which did not invitesolution. And what the structure and proportions of the olden worshippers could have been, Cartersteadily refused to conjecture.
When the ship rounded the edge, and sailed over those lands unseen by man,there appeared in the queer landscape certain signs of life, and Carter saw many low, broad,round cottages in fields of grotesque whitish fungi. He noticed that these cottages had no windows,and thought that their shape suggested the huts of Esquimaux. Then he glimpsed the oily wavesof a sluggish sea, and knew that the voyage was once more to be by water—or at least throughsome liquid. The galley struck the surface with a peculiar sound, and the odd elastic way thewaves received it was very perplexing to Carter. They now slid along at great speed, once passingand hailing another galley of kindred form, but generally seeing nothing but that curious seaand a sky that was black and star-strown even though the sun shone scorchingly in it.
There presently rose ahead the jagged hills of a leprous-looking coast, andCarter saw the thick unpleasant grey towers of a city. The way they leaned and bent, the mannerin which they were clustered, and the fact that they had no windows at all, was very disturbingto the prisoner; and he bitterly mourned the folly which had made him sip the curious wine ofthat merchant with the humped turban. As the coast drew nearer, and the hideous stench of thatcity grew stronger, he saw upon the jagged hills many forests, some of whose trees he recognisedas akin to that solitary moon-tree in the enchanted wood of earth, from whose sap the smallbrown zoogs ferment their peculiar wine.
Carter could now distinguish moving figures on the noisome wharves ahead, andthe better he saw them the worse he began to fear and detest them. For they were not men atall, or even approximately men, but great greyish-white slippery things which could expand andcontract at will, and whose principal shape—though it often changed—was that ofa sort of toad without any eyes, but with a curiously vibrating mass of short pink tentacleson the end of its blunt, vague snout. These objects were waddling busily about the wharves,moving bales and crates and boxes with preternatural strength, and now and then hopping on oroff some anchored galley with long oars in their fore paws. And now and then one would appeardriving a herd of clumping slaves, which indeed were approximate human beings with wide mouthslike those merchants who traded in Dylath-Leen; only these herds, being without turbans or shoesor clothing, did not seem so very human after all. Some of these slaves—the fatter ones,whom a sort of overseer would pinch experimentally—were unloaded from ships and nailedin crates which workers pushed into low warehouses or loaded on great lumbering vans.
Once a van was hitched up and driven off, and the fabulous thing which drewit was such that Carter gasped, even after having seen the other monstrosities of that hatefulplace. Now and then a small herd of slaves dressed and turbaned like the dark merchants wouldbe driven aboard a galley, followed by a great crew of the slippery grey toad-things as officers,navigators, and rowers. And Carter saw that the almost-human creatures were reserved for themore ignominious kinds of servitude which required no strength, such as steering and cooking,fetching and carrying, and bargaining with men on the earth or other planets where they traded.These creatures must have been convenient on earth, for they were truly not unlike men whendressed and carefully shod and turbaned, and could haggle in the shops of men without embarrassmentor curious explanations. But most of them, unless lean and ill-favoured, were unclothed andpacked in crates and drawn off in lumbering lorries by fabulous things. Occasionally other beingswere unloaded and crated; some very like these semi-humans, some not so similar, and some notsimilar at all. And he wondered if any of the poor stout black men of Parg were left to be unloadedand crated and shipped inland in those obnoxious drays.
When the galley landed at a greasy-looking quay of spongy rock a nightmarehorde of toad-things wiggled out of the hatches, and two of them seized Carter and draggedhim ashore. The smell and aspect of that city are beyond telling, and Carter held only scatteredimages of the tiled streets and black doorways and endless precipices of grey vertical wallswithout windows. At length he was dragged within a low doorway and made to climb infinite stepsin pitch blackness. It was, apparently, all one to the toad-things whether it were light ordark. The odour of the place was intolerable, and when Carter was locked into a chamber andleft alone he scarcely had strength to crawl around and ascertain its form and dimensions. Itwas circular, and about twenty feet across.
From then on time ceased to exist. At intervals food was pushed in, but Carterwould not touch it. What his fate would be, he did not know; but he felt that he was held forthe coming of that frightful soul and messenger of infinity’s Other Gods, the crawlingchaos Nyarlathotep. Finally, after an unguessed span of hours or days, the great stone doorswung wide again and Carter was shoved down the stairs and out into the red-litten streets ofthat fearsome city. It was night on the moon, and all through the town were stationed slavesbearing torches.
In a detestable square a sort of procession was formed; ten of the toad-thingsand twenty-four almost-human torch-bearers, eleven on either side, and one each before and behind.Carter was placed in the middle of the line; five toad-things ahead and five behind, and onealmost-human torch-bearer on each side of him. Certain of the toad-things produced disgustinglycarven flutes of ivory and made loathsome sounds. To that hellish piping the column advancedout of the tiled streets and into nighted plains of obscene fungi, soon commencing to climbone of the lower and more gradual hills that lay behind the city. That on some frightful slopeor blasphemous plateau the crawling chaos waited, Carter could not doubt; and he wished thatthe suspense might soon be over. The whining of those impious flutes was shocking, and he wouldhave given worlds for some even half-normal sound; but these toad-things had no voices, andthe slaves did not talk.
Then through that star-specked darkness there did come a normal sound. It rolledfrom the higher hills, and from all the jagged peaks around it was caught up and echoed in aswelling pandaemoniac chorus. It was the midnight yell of the cat, and Carter knew at last thatthe old village folk were right when they made low guesses about the cryptical realms whichare known only to cats, and to which the elders among cats repair by stealth nocturnally, springingfrom high housetops. Verily, it is to the moon’s dark side that they go to leap and gambolon the hills and converse with ancient shadows, and here amidst that column of foetid thingsCarter heard their homely, friendly cry, and thought of the steep roofs and warm hearths andlittle lighted windows of home.
Now much of the speech of cats was known to Randolph Carter, and in this far,terrible place he uttered the cry that was suitable. But that he need not have done, for evenas his lips opened he heard the chorus wax and draw nearer, and saw swift shadows against thestars as small graceful shapes leaped from hill to hill in gathering legions. The call of theclan had been given, and before the foul procession had time even to be frightened a cloud ofsmothering fur and a phalanx of murderous claws were tidally and tempestuously upon it. Theflutes stopped, and there were shrieks in the night. Dying almost-humans screamed, and catsspit and yowled and roared, but the toad-things made never a sound as their stinking green ichoroozed fatally upon that porous earth with the obscene fungi.
It was a stupendous sight while the torches lasted, and Carter had never beforeseen so many cats. Black, grey, and white; yellow, tiger, and mixed; common, Persian, and Manx;Thibetan, Angora, and Egyptian; all were there in the fury of battle, and there hovered overthem some trace of that profound and inviolate sanctity which made their goddess great in thetemples of Bubastis. They would leap seven strong at the throat of an almost-human or the pinktentacled snout of a toad-thing and drag it down savagely to the fungous plain, where myriadsof their fellows would surge over it and into it with the frenzied claws and teeth of a divinebattle-fury. Carter had seized a torch from a stricken slave, but was soon overborne by thesurging waves of his loyal defenders. Then he lay in the utter blackness hearing the clangourof war and the shouts of the victors, and feeling the soft paws of his friends as they rushedto and fro over him in the fray.
At last awe and exhaustion closed his eyes, and when he opened them again itwas upon a strange scene. The great shining disc of the earth, thirteen times greater than thatof the moon as we see it, had risen with floods of weird light over the lunar landscape; andacross all those leagues of wild plateau and ragged crest there squatted one endless sea ofcats in orderly array. Circle on circle they reached, and two or three leaders out of the rankswere licking his face and purring to him consolingly. Of the dead slaves and toad-things therewere not many signs, but Carter thought he saw one bone a little way off in the open space betweenhim and the beginning of the solid circles of the warriors.
Carter now spoke with the leaders in the soft language of cats, and learnedthat his ancient friendship with the species was well known and often spoken of in the placeswhere cats congregate. He had not been unmarked in Ulthar when he passed through, and the sleekold cats had remembered how he petted them after they had attended to the hungry zoogs who lookedevilly at a small black kitten. And they recalled, too, how he had welcomed the very littlekitten who came to see him at the inn, and how he had given it a saucer of rich cream in themorning before he left. The grandfather of that very little kitten was the leader of the armynow assembled, for he had seen the evil procession from a far hill and recognised the prisoneras a sworn friend of his kind on earth and in the land of dream.
A yowl now came from a farther peak, and the old leader paused abruptly inhis conversation. It was one of the army’s outposts, stationed on the highest of the mountainsto watch the one foe which earth’s cats fear; the very large and peculiar cats from Saturn,who for some reason have not been oblivious of the charm of our moon’s dark side. Theyare leagued by treaty with the evil toad-things, and are notoriously hostile to our earthlycats; so that at this juncture a meeting would have been a somewhat grave matter.
After a brief consultation of generals, the cats rose and assumed a closerformation, crowding protectingly around Carter and preparing to take the great leap throughspace back to the housetops of our earth and its dreamland. The old field-marshal advised Carterto let himself be borne along smoothly and passively in the massed ranks of furry leapers, andtold him how to spring when the rest sprang and land gracefully when the rest landed. He alsooffered to deposit him in any spot he desired, and Carter decided on the city of Dylath-Leenwhence the black galley had set out; for he wished to sail thence for Oriab and the carven crestof Ngranek, and also to warn the people of the city to have no more traffick with black galleys,if indeed that traffick could be tactfully and judiciously broken off. Then, upon a signal,the cats all leaped gracefully with their friend packed securely in their midst; while in ablack cave on a far unhallowed summit of the moon-mountains still vainly waited the crawlingchaos Nyarlathotep.
The leap of the cats through space was very swift; and being surrounded byhis companions, Carter did not see this time the great black shapelessnesses that lurk and caperand flounder in the abyss. Before he fully realised what had happened he was back in his familiarroom at the inn at Dylath-Leen, and the stealthy, friendly cats were pouring out of the windowin streams. The old leader from Ulthar was the last to leave, and as Carter shook his paw hesaid he would be able to get home by cockcrow. When dawn came, Carter went downstairs and learnedthat a week had elapsed since his capture and leaving. There was still nearly a fortnight towait for the ship bound toward Oriab, and during that time he said what he could against theblack galleys and their infamous ways. Most of the townsfolk believed him; yet so fond werethe jewellers of great rubies that none would wholly promise to cease trafficking with the wide-mouthedmerchants. If aught of evil ever befalls Dylath-Leen through such traffick, it will not be hisfault.
In about a week the desiderate ship put in by the black mole and tall lighthouse,and Carter was glad to see that she was a barque of wholesome men, with painted sides and yellowlateen sails and a grey captain in silken robes. Her cargo was the fragrant resin of Oriab’sinner groves, and the delicate pottery baked by the artists of Baharna, and the strange littlefigures carved from Ngranek’s ancient lava. For this they were paid in the wool of Ultharand the iridescent textiles of Hatheg and the ivory that the black men carve across the riverin Parg. Carter made arrangements with the captain to go to Baharna and was told that the voyagewould take ten days. And during his week of waiting he talked much with that captain of Ngranek,and was told that very few had seen the carven face thereon; but that most travellers are contentto learn its legends from old people and lava-gatherers and image-makers in Baharna and afterwardsay in their far homes that they have indeed beheld it. The captain was not even sure that anyperson now living had beheld that carven face, for the wrong side of Ngranek is very difficultand barren and sinister, and there are rumours of caves near the peak wherein dwell the night-gaunts.But the captain did not wish to say just what a night-gaunt might be like, since such cattleare known to haunt most persistently the dreams of those who think too often of them. Then Carterasked that captain about unknown Kadath in the cold waste, and the marvellous sunset city, butof these the good man could truly tell nothing.
Carter sailed out of Dylath-Leen one early morning when the tide turned, andsaw the first rays of sunrise on the thin angular towers of that dismal basalt town. And fortwo days they sailed eastward in sight of green coasts, and saw often the pleasant fishing townsthat climbed up steeply with their red roofs and chimney-pots from old dreaming wharves andbeaches where nets lay drying. But on the third day they turned sharply south where the rollof the water was stronger, and soon passed from sight of any land. On the fifth day the sailorswere nervous, but the captain apologised for their fears, saying that the ship was about topass over the weedy walls and broken columns of a sunken city too old for memory, and that whenthe water was clear one could see so many moving shadows in that deep place that simple folkdisliked it. He admitted, moreover, that many ships had been lost in that part of the sea; havingbeen hailed when quite close to it, but never seen again.
That night the moon was very bright, and one could see a great way down inthe water. There was so little wind that the ship could not move much, and the ocean was verycalm. Looking over the rail Carter saw many fathoms deep the dome of a great temple, and infront of it an avenue of unnatural sphinxes leading to what was once a public square. Dolphinssported merrily in and out of the ruins, and porpoises revelled clumsily here and there, sometimescoming to the surface and leaping clear out of the sea. As the ship drifted on a little thefloor of the ocean rose in hills, and one could clearly mark the lines of ancient climbing streetsand the washed-down walls of myriad little houses.
Then the suburbs appeared, and finally a great lone building on a hill, ofsimpler architecture than the other structures, and in much better repair. It was dark and lowand covered four sides of a square, with a tower at each corner, a paved court in the centre,and small curious round windows all over it. Probably it was of basalt, though weeds drapedthe greater part; and such was its lonely and impressive place on that far hill that it mayhave been a temple or monastery. Some phosphorescent fish inside it gave the small round windowsan aspect of shining, and Carter did not blame the sailors much for their fears. Then by thewatery moonlight he noticed an odd high monolith in the middle of that central court, and sawthat something was tied to it. And when after getting a telescope from the captain’s cabinhe saw that that bound thing was a sailor in the silk robes of Oriab, head downward and withoutany eyes, he was glad that a rising breeze soon took the ship ahead to more healthy parts ofthe sea.
The next day they spoke with a ship with violet sails bound for Zar, in the landof forgotten dreams, with bulbs of strange coloured lilies for cargo. And on the evening ofthe eleventh day they came in sight of the isle of Oriab, with Ngranek rising jagged and snow-crownedin the distance. Oriab is a very great isle, and its port of Baharna a mighty city. The wharvesof Baharna are of porphyry, and the city rises in great stone terraces behind them, having streetsof steps that are frequently arched over by buildings and the bridges between buildings. Thereis a great canal which goes under the whole city in a tunnel with granite gates and leads tothe inland lake of Yath, on whose farther shore are the vast clay-brick ruins of a primal citywhose name is not remembered. As the ship drew into the harbour at evening the twin beaconsThon and Thal gleamed a welcome, and in all the million windows of Baharna’s terracesmellow lights peeped out quietly and gradually as the stars peep out overhead in the dusk, tillthat steep and climbing seaport became a glittering constellation hung between the stars ofheaven and the reflections of those stars in the still harbour.
The captain, after landing, made Carter a guest in his own small house on theshore of Yath where the rear of the town slopes down to it; and his wife and servants broughtstrange toothsome foods for the traveller’s delight. And in the days after that Carterasked for rumours and legends of Ngranek in all the taverns and public places where lava-gatherersand image-makers meet, but could find no one who had been up the higher slopes or seen the carvenface. Ngranek was a hard mountain with only an accursed valley behind it, and besides, one couldnever depend on the certainty that night-gaunts are altogether fabulous.
When the captain sailed back to Dylath-Leen Carter took quarters in an ancienttavern opening on an alley of steps in the original part of the town, which is built of brickand resembles the ruins of Yath’s farther shore. Here he laid his plans for the ascentof Ngranek, and correlated all that he had learned from the lava-gatherers about the roads thither.The keeper of the tavern was a very old man, and had heard so many legends that he was a greathelp. He even took Carter to an upper room in that ancient house and shewed him a crude picturewhich a traveller had scratched on the clay wall in the olden days when men were bolder andless reluctant to visit Ngranek’s higher slopes. The old tavern-keeper’s great-grandfatherhad heard from his great-grandfather that the traveller who scratched that picture had climbedNgranek and seen the carven face, here drawing it for others to behold; but Carter had verygreat doubts, since the large rough features on the wall were hasty and careless, and whollyovershadowed by a crowd of little companion shapes in the worst possible taste, with horns andwings and claws and curling tails.
At last, having gained all the information he was likely to gain in the tavernsand public places of Baharna, Carter hired a zebra and set out one morning on the road by Yath’sshore for those inland parts wherein towers stony Ngranek. On his right were rolling hills andpleasant orchards and neat little stone farmhouses, and he was much reminded of those fertilefields that flank the Skai. By evening he was near the nameless ancient ruins on Yath’sfarther shore, and though old lava-gatherers had warned him not to camp there at night, he tetheredhis zebra to a curious pillar before a crumbling wall and laid his blanket in a sheltered cornerbeneath some carvings whose meaning none could decipher. Around him he wrapped another blanket,for the nights are cold in Oriab; and when upon awaking once he thought he felt the wings ofsome insect brushing his face he covered his head altogether and slept in peace till rousedby the magah birds in distant resin groves.
The sun had just come up over the great slope whereon leagues of primal brickfoundations and worn walls and occasional cracked pillars and pedestals stretched down desolateto the shore of Yath, and Carter looked about for his tethered zebra. Great was his dismay tosee that docile beast stretched prostrate beside the curious pillar to which it had been tied,and still greater was he vexed on finding that the steed was quite dead, with its blood allsucked away through a singular wound in its throat. His pack had been disturbed, and severalshiny knick-knacks taken away, and all around on the dusty soil were great webbed footprintsfor which he could not in any way account. The legends and warnings of lava-gatherers occurredto him and he thought of what had brushed his face in the night. Then he shouldered his packand strode on toward Ngranek, though not without a shiver when he saw close to him as the highwaypassed through the ruins a great gaping arch low in the wall of an old temple, with steps leadingdown into darkness farther than he could peer.
His course now led uphill through wilder and partly wooded country, and hesaw only the huts of charcoal-burners and the camps of those who gathered resin from the groves.The whole air was fragrant with balsam, and all the magah birds sang blithely as they flashedtheir seven colours in the sun. Near sunset he came on a new camp of lava-gatherers returningwith laden sacks from Ngranek’s lower slopes; and here he also camped, listening to thesongs and tales of the men, and overhearing what they whispered about a companion they had lost.He had climbed high to reach a mass of fine lava above him, and at nightfall did not returnto his fellows. When they looked for him the next day they found only his turban, nor was thereany sign on the crags below that he had fallen. They did not search any more, because the oldmen among them said it would be of no use. No one ever found what the night-gaunts took, thoughthose beasts themselves were so uncertain as to be almost fabulous. Carter asked them if night-gauntssucked blood and liked shiny things and left webbed footprints, but they all shook their headsnegatively and seemed frightened at his making such an inquiry. When he saw how taciturn theyhad become he asked them no more, but went to sleep in his blanket.
The next day he rose with the lava-gatherers and exchanged farewells as theyrode west and he rode east on a zebra he had bought of them. Their older men gave him blessingsand warnings, and told him he had better not climb too high on Ngranek, but while he thankedthem heartily he was in no wise dissuaded. For still did he feel that he must find the godson unknown Kadath, and win from them a way to that haunting and marvellous city in the sunset.By noon, after a long uphill ride, he came upon some abandoned brick villages of the hill-peoplewho had once dwelt thus close to Ngranek and carved images from its smooth lava. Here they haddwelt till the days of the old tavern-keeper’s grandfather, but about that time they feltthat their presence was disliked. Their homes had crept even up the mountain’s slope,and the higher they built the more people they would miss when the sun rose. At last they decidedit would be better to leave altogether, since things were sometimes glimpsed in the darknesswhich no one could interpret favourably; so in the end all of them went down to the sea anddwelt in Baharna, inhabiting a very old quarter and teaching their sons the old art of image-makingwhich to this day they carry on. It was from these children of the exiled hill-people that Carterhad heard the best tales about Ngranek when searching through Baharna’s ancient taverns.
All this time the great gaunt side of Ngranek was looming up higher and higheras Carter approached it. There were sparse trees on the lower slope, and feeble shrubs abovethem, and then the bare hideous rock rose spectral into the sky to mix with frost and ice andeternal snow. Carter could see the rifts and ruggedness of that sombre stone, and did not welcomethe prospect of climbing it. In places there were solid streams of lava, and scoriac heaps thatlittered slopes and ledges. Ninety aeons ago, before even the gods had danced upon its pointedpeak, that mountain had spoken with fire and roared with the voices of the inner thunders. Nowit towered all silent and sinister, bearing on the hidden side that secret titan image whereofrumour told. And there were caves in that mountain, which might be empty and alone with elderdarkness, or might—if legend spoke truly—hold horrors of a form not to be surmised.
The ground sloped upward to the foot of Ngranek, thinly covered with scruboaks and ash trees, and strown with bits of rock, lava, and ancient cinder. There were the charredembers of many camps, where the lava-gatherers were wont to stop, and several rude altars whichthey had built either to propitiate the Great Ones or to ward off what they dreamed of in Ngranek’shigh passes and labyrinthine caves. At evening Carter reached the farthermost pile of embersand camped for the night, tethering his zebra to a sapling and wrapping himself well in hisblanket before going to sleep. And all through the night a voonith howled distantly from theshore of some hidden pool, but Carter felt no fear of that amphibious terror, since he had beentold with certainty that not one of them dares even approach the slopes of Ngranek.
In the clear sunshine of morning Carter began the long ascent, taking his zebraas far as that useful beast could go, but tying it to a stunted ash tree when the floor of thethin road became too steep. Thereafter he scrambled up alone; first through the forest withits ruins of old villages in overgrown clearings, and then over the tough grass where anaemicshrubs grew here and there. He regretted coming clear of the trees, since the slope was veryprecipitous and the whole thing rather dizzying. At length he began to discern all the countrysidespread out beneath him whenever he looked around; the deserted huts of the image-makers, thegroves of resin trees and the camps of those who gathered from them, the woods where prismaticmagahs nest and sing, and even a hint very far away of the shores of Yath and of those forbiddingancient ruins whose name is forgotten. He found it best not to look around, and kept on climbingand climbing till the shrubs became very sparse and there was often nothing but the tough grassto cling to.
Then the soil became meagre, with great patches of bare rock cropping out,and now and then the nest of a condor in a crevice. Finally there was nothing at all but thebare rock, and had it not been very rough and weathered, he could scarcely have ascended farther.Knobs, ledges, and pinnacles, however, helped greatly; and it was cheering to see occasionallythe sign of some lava-gatherer scratched clumsily in the friable stone, and know that wholesomehuman creatures had been there before him. After a certain height the presence of man was furthershewn by hand-holds and foot-holds hewn where they were needed, and by little quarries and excavationswhere some choice vein or stream of lava had been found. In one place a narrow ledge had beenchopped artificially to an especially rich deposit far to the right of the main line of ascent.Once or twice Carter dared to look around, and was almost stunned by the spread of landscapebelow. All the island betwixt him and the coast lay open to his sight, with Baharna’sstone terraces and the smoke of its chimneys mystical in the distance. And beyond that the illimitableSouthern Sea with all its curious secrets.
Thus far there had been much winding around the mountain, so that the fartherand carven side was still hidden. Carter now saw a ledge running upward and to the left whichseemed to head the way he wished, and this course he took in the hope that it might prove continuous.After ten minutes he saw it was indeed no cul-de-sac, but that it led steeply on in an arc whichwould, unless suddenly interrupted or deflected, bring him after a few hours’ climbingto that unknown southern slope overlooking the desolate crags and the accursed valley of lava.As new country came into view below him he saw that it was bleaker and wilder than those seawardlands he had traversed. The mountain’s side, too, was somewhat different; being here piercedby curious cracks and caves not found on the straighter route he had left. Some of these wereabove him and some beneath him, all opening on sheerly perpendicular cliffs and wholly unreachableby the feet of man. The air was very cold now, but so hard was the climbing that he did notmind it. Only the increasing rarity bothered him, and he thought that perhaps it was this whichhad turned the heads of other travellers and excited those absurd tales of night-gaunts wherebythey explained the loss of such climbers as fell from these perilous paths. He was not muchimpressed by travellers’ tales, but had a good curved scimitar in case of any trouble.All lesser thoughts were lost in the wish to see that carven face which might set him on thetrack of the gods atop unknown Kadath.
At last, in the fearsome iciness of upper space, he came round fully to thehidden side of Ngranek and saw in infinite gulfs below him the lesser crags and sterile abyssesof lava which marked the olden wrath of the Great Ones. There was unfolded, too, a vast expanseof country to the south; but it was a desert land without fair fields or cottage chimneys, andseemed to have no ending. No trace of the sea was visible on this side, for Oriab is a greatisland. Black caverns and odd crevices were still numerous on the sheer vertical cliffs, butnone of them was accessible to a climber. There now loomed aloft a great beetling mass whichhampered the upward view, and Carter was for a moment shaken with doubt lest it prove impassable.Poised in windy insecurity miles above earth, with only space and death on one side and onlyslippery walls of rock on the other, he knew for a moment the fear that makes men shun Ngranek’shidden side. He could not turn round, yet the sun was already low. If there were no way aloft,the night would find him crouching there still, and the dawn would not find him at all.
But there was a way, and he saw it in due season. Only a very expert dreamercould have used those imperceptible foot-holds, yet to Carter they were sufficient. Surmountingnow the outward-hanging rock, he found the slope above much easier than that below, since agreat glacier’s melting had left a generous space with loam and ledges. To the left aprecipice dropped straight from unknown heights to unknown depths, with a cave’s darkmouth just out of reach above him. Elsewhere, however, the mountain slanted back strongly, andeven gave him space to lean and rest.
He felt from the chill that he must be near the snow line, and looked up tosee what glittering pinnacles might be shining in that late ruddy sunlight. Surely enough, therewas the snow uncounted thousands of feet above, and below it a great beetling crag like thathe had just climbed; hanging there forever in bold outline, black against the white of the frozenpeak. And when he saw that crag he gasped and cried out aloud, and clutched at the jagged rockin awe; for the titan bulge had not stayed as earth’s dawn had shaped it, but gleamedred and stupendous in the sunset with the carved and polished features of a god.
Stern and terrible shone that face that the sunset lit with fire. How vastit was no mind can ever measure, but Carter knew at once that man could never have fashionedit. It was a god chiselled by the hands of the gods, and it looked down haughty and majesticupon the seeker. Rumour had said it was strange and not to be mistaken, and Carter saw thatit was indeed so; for those long narrow eyes and long-lobed ears, and that thin nose and pointedchin, all spoke of a race that is not of men but of gods. He clung overawed in that lofty andperilous eyrie, even though it was this which he had expected and come to find; for there isin a god’s face more of marvel than prediction can tell, and when that face is vasterthan a great temple and seen looking down at sunset in the cryptic silences of that upper worldfrom whose dark lava it was divinely hewn of old, the marvel is so strong that none may escapeit.
Here, too, was the added marvel of recognition; for although he had plannedto search all dreamland over for those whose likeness to this face might mark them as the gods’children, he now knew that he need not do so. Certainly, the great face carven on that mountainwas of no strange sort, but the kin of such as he had seen often in the taverns of the seaportCelephaïs which lies in Ooth-Nargai beyond the Tanarian Hills and is ruled over by thatKing Kuranes whom Carter once knew in waking life. Every year sailors with such a face camein dark ships from the north to trade their onyx for the carved jade and spun gold and littlered singing birds of Celephaïs, and it was clear that these could be no others than thehalf-gods he sought. Where they dwelt, there must the cold waste lie close, and within it unknownKadath and its onyx castle for the Great Ones. So to Celephaïs he must go, far distantfrom the isle of Oriab, and in such parts as would take him back to Dylath-Leen and up the Skaito the bridge by Nir, and again into the enchanted wood of the zoogs, whence the way would bendnorthward through the garden lands by Oukranos to the gilded spires of Thran, where he mightfind a galleon bound over the Cerenerian Sea.
But dusk was now thick, and the great carven face looked down even sternerin shadow. Perched on that ledge night found the seeker; and in the blackness he might neithergo down nor go up, but only stand and cling and shiver in that narrow place till the day came,praying to keep awake lest sleep loose his hold and send him down the dizzy miles of air tothe crags and sharp rocks of the accursed valley. The stars came out, but save for them therewas only black nothingness in his eyes; nothingness leagued with death, against whose beckoninghe might do no more than cling to the rocks and lean back away from an unseen brink. The lastthing of earth that he saw in the gloaming was a condor soaring close to the westward precipicebeside him, and darting screaming away when it came near the cave whose mouth yawned just outof reach.
Suddenly, without a warning sound in the dark, Carter felt his curved scimitardrawn stealthily out of his belt by some unseen hand. Then he heard it clatter down over therocks below. And between him and the Milky Way he thought he saw a very terrible outline ofsomething noxiously thin and horned and tailed and bat-winged. Other things, too, had begunto blot out patches of stars west of him, as if a flock of vague entities were flapping thicklyand silently out of that inaccessible cave in the face of the precipice. Then a sort of coldrubbery arm seized his neck and something else seized his feet, and he was lifted inconsideratelyup and swung about in space. Another minute and the stars were gone, and Carter knew that thenight-gaunts had got him.
They bore him breathless into that cliffside cavern and through monstrous labyrinthsbeyond. When he struggled, as at first he did by instinct, they tickled him with deliberation.They made no sound at all themselves, and even their membraneous wings were silent. They werefrightfully cold and damp and slippery, and their paws kneaded one detestably. Soon they wereplunging hideously downward through inconceivable abysses in a whirling, giddying, sickeningrush of dank, tomb-like air; and Carter felt they were shooting into the ultimate vortexof shrieking and daemonic madness. He screamed again and again, but whenever he did so the blackpaws tickled him with greater subtlety. Then he saw a sort of grey phosphorescence about, andguessed they were coming even to that inner world of subterrene horror of which dim legendstell, and which is litten only by the pale death-fire wherewith reeks the ghoulish air and theprimal mists of the pits at earth’s core.
At last far below him he saw faint lines of grey and ominous pinnacleswhich he knew must be the fabled Peaks of Thok. Awful and sinister they stand in the haunteddusk of sunless and eternal depths; higher than man may reckon, and guarding terrible valleyswhere the bholes crawl and burrow nastily. But Carter preferred to look at them than at hiscaptors, which were indeed shocking and uncouth black beings with smooth, oily, whale-like surfaces,unpleasant horns that curved inward toward each other, bat-wings whose beating made no sound,ugly prehensile paws, and barbed tails that lashed needlessly and disquietingly. And worst ofall, they never spoke or laughed, and never smiled because they had no faces at all to smilewith, but only a suggestive blankness where a face ought to be. All they ever did was clutchand fly and tickle; that was the way of night-gaunts.
As the band flew lower the Peaks of Thok rose grey and towering on all sides,and one saw clearly that nothing lived on that austere and impassive granite of the endlesstwilight. At still lower levels the death-fires in the air gave out, and one met only the primalblackness of the void save aloft where the thin peaks stood out goblin-like. Soon the peakswere very far away, and nothing about but great rushing winds with the dankness of nethermostgrottoes in them. Then in the end the night-gaunts landed on a floor of unseen things whichfelt like layers of bones, and left Carter all alone in that black valley. To bring him thitherwas the duty of the night-gaunts that guard Ngranek; and this done, they flapped away silently.When Carter tried to trace their flight he found he could not, since even the Peaks of Thokhad faded out of sight. There was nothing anywhere but blackness and horror and silence andbones.
Now Carter knew from a certain source that he was in the vale of Pnath, wherecrawl and burrow the enormous bholes; but he did not know what to expect, because no one hasever seen a bhole or even guessed what such a thing may be like. Bholes are known only by dimrumour, from the rustling they make amongst mountains of bones and the slimy touch they havewhen they wriggle past one. They cannot be seen because they creep only in the dark. Carterdid not wish to meet a bhole, so listened intently for any sound in the unknown depths of bonesabout him. Even in this fearsome place he had a plan and an objective, for whispers of Pnathand its approaches were not unknown to one with whom he had talked much in the old days. Inbrief, it seemed fairly likely that this was the spot into which all the ghouls of the wakingworld cast the refuse of their feastings; and that if he but had good luck he might stumbleupon that mighty crag taller even than Thok’s peaks which marks the edge of their domain.Showers of bones would tell him where to look, and once found he could call to a ghoul to letdown a ladder; for strange to say, he had a very singular link with these terrible creatures.
A man he had known in Boston—a painter of strange pictures with a secretstudio in an ancient and unhallowed alley near a graveyard—had actually made friends withthe ghouls and had taught him to understand the simpler part of their disgusting meeping andglibbering. This man had vanished at last, and Carter was not sure but that he might find himnow, and use for the first time in dreamland that far-away English of his dim waking life. Inany case, he felt he could persuade a ghoul to guide him out of Pnath; and it would be betterto meet a ghoul, which one can see, than a bhole, which one cannot see.
So Carter walked in the dark, and ran when he thought he heard something amongthe bones underfoot. Once he bumped into a stony slope, and knew it must be the base of oneof Thok’s peaks. Then at last he heard a monstrous rattling and clatter which reachedfar up in the air, and became sure he had come nigh the crag of the ghouls. He was not surehe could be heard from this valley miles below, but realised that the inner world has strangelaws. As he pondered he was struck by a flying bone so heavy that it must have been a skull,and therefore realising his nearness to the fateful crag he sent up as best he might that meepingcry which is the call of the ghoul.
Sound travels slowly, so that it was some time before he heard an answeringglibber. But it came at last, and before long he was told that a rope ladder would be lowered.The wait for this was very tense, since there was no telling what might not have been stirredup among those bones by his shouting. Indeed, it was not long before he actually did hear avague rustling afar off. As this thoughtfully approached, he became more and more uncomfortable;for he did not wish to move away from the spot where the ladder would come. Finally the tensiongrew almost unbearable, and he was about to flee in panic when the thud of something on thenewly heaped bones nearby drew his notice from the other sound. It was the ladder, and aftera minute of groping he had it taut in his hands. But the other sound did not cease, and followedhim even as he climbed. He had gone fully five feet from the ground when the rattling beneathwaxed emphatic, and was a good ten feet up when something swayed the ladder from below. At aheight which must have been fifteen or twenty feet he felt his whole side brushed by a greatslippery length which grew alternately convex and concave with wriggling, and thereafter heclimbed desperately to escape the unendurable nuzzling of that loathsome and overfed bhole whoseform no man might see.
For hours he climbed with aching arms and blistered hands, seeing again thegrey death-fire and Thok’s uncomfortable pinnacles. At last he discerned above him theprojecting edge of the great crag of the ghouls, whose vertical side he could not glimpse; andhours later he saw a curious face peering over it as a gargoyle peers over a parapet of NotreDame. This almost made him lose his hold through faintness, but a moment later he was himselfagain; for his vanished friend Richard Pickman had once introduced him to a ghoul, and he knewwell their canine faces and slumping forms and unmentionable idiosyncrasies. So he had himselfwell under control when that hideous thing pulled him out of the dizzy emptiness over the edgeof the crag, and did not scream at the partly consumed refuse heaped at one side or at the squattingcircles of ghouls who gnawed and watched curiously.
He was now on a dim-litten plain whose sole topographical features were greatboulders and the entrances of burrows. The ghouls were in general respectful, even if one didattempt to pinch him while several others eyed his leanness speculatively. Through patient glibberinghe made inquiries regarding his vanished friend, and found he had become a ghoul of some prominencein abysses nearer the waking world. A greenish elderly ghoul offered to conduct him to Pickman’spresent habitation, so despite a natural loathing he followed the creature into a capaciousburrow and crawled after him for hours in the blackness of rank mould. They emerged on a dimplain strown with singular relics of earth—old gravestones, broken urns, and grotesquefragments of monuments—and Carter realised with some emotion that he was probably nearerthe waking world than at any other time since he had gone down the seven hundred steps fromthe cavern of flame to the Gate of Deeper Slumber.
There, on a tombstone of 1768 stolen from the Granary Burying Ground in Boston,sat the ghoul which was once the artist Richard Upton Pickman. It was naked and rubbery, andhad acquired so much of the ghoulish physiognomy that its human origin was already obscure.But it still remembered a little English, and was able to converse with Carter in grunts andmonosyllables, helped out now and then by the glibbering of ghouls. When it learned that Carterwished to get to the enchanted wood and from there to the city Celephaïs in Ooth-Nargaibeyond the Tanarian Hills, it seemed rather doubtful; for these ghouls of the waking world dono business in the graveyards of upper dreamland (leaving that to the web-footed wamps thatare spawned in dead cities), and many things intervene betwixt their gulf and the enchantedwood, including the terrible kingdom of the gugs.
The gugs, hairy and gigantic, once reared stone circles in that wood and madestrange sacrifices to the Other Gods and the crawling chaos Nyarlathotep, until one night anabomination of theirs reached the ears of earth’s gods and they were banished to cavernsbelow. Only a great trap-door of stone with an iron ring connects the abyss of the earth-ghoulswith the enchanted wood, and this the gugs are afraid to open because of a curse. That a mortaldreamer could traverse their cavern realm and leave by that door is inconceivable; for mortaldreamers were their former food, and they have legends of the toothsomeness of such dreamerseven though banishment has restricted their diet to the ghasts, those repulsive beings whichdie in the light, and which live in the vaults of Zin and leap on long hind legs like kangaroos.
So the ghoul that was Pickman advised Carter either to leave the abyss at Sarkomand,that deserted city in the valley below Leng where black nitrous stairways guarded by wingeddiorite lions lead down from dreamland to the lower gulfs, or to return through a churchyardto the waking world and begin the quest anew down the seventy steps of light slumber to thecavern of flame and the seven hundred steps to the Gate of Deeper Slumber and the enchantedwood. This, however, did not suit the seeker; for he knew nothing of the way from Leng to Ooth-Nargai,and was likewise reluctant to awake lest he forget all he had so far gained in this dream. Itwere disastrous to his quest to forget the august and celestial faces of those seamen from thenorth who traded onyx in Celephaïs, and who, being the sons of gods, must point the wayto the cold waste and Kadath where the Great Ones dwell.
After much persuasion the ghoul consented to guide his guest inside the greatwall of the gugs’ kingdom. There was one chance that Carter might be able to steal throughthat twilight realm of circular stone towers at an hour when the giants would be all gorgedand snoring indoors, and reach the central tower with the sign of Koth upon it, which has thestairs leading up to that stone trap-door in the enchanted wood. Pickman even consented to lendthree ghouls to help with a tombstone lever in raising the stone door; for of ghouls the gugsare somewhat afraid, and they often flee from their own colossal graveyards when they see feastingthere.
He also advised Carter to disguise as a ghoul himself; shaving the beard hehad allowed to grow (for ghouls have none), wallowing naked in the mould to get the correctsurface, and loping in the usual slumping way, with his clothing carried in a bundle as if itwere a choice morsel from a tomb. They would reach the city of the gugs—which is coterminouswith the whole kingdom—through the proper burrows, emerging in a cemetery not far fromthe stair-containing Tower of Koth. They must beware, however, of a large cave near the cemetery;for this is the mouth of the vaults of Zin, and the vindictive ghasts are always on watch theremurderously for those denizens of the upper abyss who hunt and prey on them. The ghasts tryto come out when the gugs sleep, and they attack ghouls as readily as gugs, for they cannotdiscriminate. They are very primitive, and eat one another. The gugs have a sentry at a narrowplace in the vaults of Zin, but he is often drowsy and is sometimes surprised by a party ofghasts. Though ghasts cannot live in real light, they can endure the grey twilight of the abyssfor hours.
So at length Carter crawled through endless burrows with three helpful ghoulsbearing the slate gravestone of Col. Nehemiah Derby, obiit 1719, from the Charter Street BuryingGround in Salem. When they came again into open twilight they were in a forest of vast lichenedmonoliths reaching nearly as high as the eye could see and forming the modest gravestones ofthe gugs. On the right of the hole out of which they wriggled, and seen through aisles of monoliths,was a stupendous vista of Cyclopean round towers mounting up illimitable into the grey air ofinner earth. This was the great city of the gugs, whose doorways are thirty feet high. Ghoulscome here often, for a buried gug will feed a community for almost a year, and even with theadded peril it is better to burrow for gugs than to bother with the graves of men. Carter nowunderstood the occasional titan bones he had felt beneath him in the vale of Pnath.
Straight ahead, and just outside the cemetery, rose a sheer perpendicular cliffat whose base an immense and forbidding cavern yawned. This the ghouls told Carter to avoidas much as possible, since it was the entrance to the unhallowed vaults of Zin where gugs huntghasts in the darkness. And truly, that warning was soon well justified; for the moment a ghoulbegan to creep toward the towers to see if the hour of the gugs’ resting had been rightlytimed, there glowed in the gloom of that great cavern’s mouth first one pair of yellowish-redeyes and then another, implying that the gugs were one sentry less, and that ghasts have indeedan excellent sharpness of smell. So the ghoul returned to the burrow and motioned his companionsto be silent. It was best to leave the ghasts to their own devices, and there was a possibilitythat they might soon withdraw, since they must naturally be rather tired after coping with agug sentry in the black vaults. After a moment something about the size of a small horse hoppedout into the grey twilight, and Carter turned sick at the aspect of that scabrous and unwholesomebeast, whose face is so curiously human despite the absence of a nose, a forehead, and otherimportant particulars.
Presently three other ghasts hopped out to join their fellow, and a ghoul glibberedsoftly at Carter that their absence of battle-scars was a bad sign. It proved that they hadnot fought the gug sentry at all, but merely slipped past him as he slept, so that their strengthand savagery were still unimpaired and would remain so till they had found and disposed of avictim. It was very unpleasant to see those filthy and disproportioned animals, which soon numberedabout fifteen, grubbing about and making their kangaroo leaps in the grey twilight where titantowers and monoliths arose, but it was still more unpleasant when they spoke among themselvesin the coughing gutturals of ghasts. And yet, horrible as they were, they were not so horribleas what presently came out of the cave after them with disconcerting suddenness.
It was a paw, fully two feet and a half across, and equipped with formidabletalons. After it came another paw, and after that a great black-furred arm to which both ofthe paws were attached by short forearms. Then two pink eyes shone, and the head of the awakenedgug sentry, large as a barrel, wobbled into view. The eyes jutted two inches from each side,shaded by bony protuberances overgrown with coarse hairs. But the head was chiefly terriblebecause of the mouth. That mouth had great yellow fangs and ran from the top to the bottom ofthe head, opening vertically instead of horizontally.
But before that unfortunate gug could emerge from the cave and rise to hisfull twenty feet, the vindictive ghasts were upon him. Carter feared for a moment that he wouldgive an alarm and arouse all his kin, till a ghoul softly glibbered that gugs have no voice,but talk by means of facial expression. The battle which then ensued was truly a frightful one.From all sides the venomous ghasts rushed feverishly at the creeping gug, nipping and tearingwith their muzzles, and mauling murderously with their hard pointed hooves. All the time theycoughed excitedly, screaming when the great vertical mouth of the gug would occasionally biteinto one of their number, so that the noise of the combat would surely have aroused the sleepingcity had not the weakening of the sentry begun to transfer the action farther and farther withinthe cavern. As it was, the tumult soon receded altogether from sight in the blackness, withonly occasional evil echoes to mark its continuance.
Then the most alert of the ghouls gave the signal for all to advance, and Carterfollowed the loping three out of the forest of monoliths and into the dark noisome streets ofthat awful city whose rounded towers of Cyclopean stone soared up beyond the sight. Silentlythey shambled over that rough rock pavement, hearing with disgust the abominable muffled snortingsfrom great black doorways which marked the slumber of the gugs. Apprehensive of the ending ofthe rest hour, the ghouls set a somewhat rapid pace; but even so the journey was no brief one,for distances in that town of giants are on a great scale. At last, however, they came to asomewhat open space before a tower even vaster than the rest, above whose colossal doorway wasfixed a monstrous symbol in bas-relief which made one shudder without knowing its meaning. Thiswas the central tower with the sign of Koth, and those huge stone steps just visible throughthe dusk within were the beginning of the great flight leading to upper dreamland and the enchantedwood.
There now began a climb of interminable length in utter blackness; made almostimpossible by the monstrous size of the steps, which were fashioned for gugs, and were thereforenearly a yard high. Of their number Carter could form no just estimate, for he soon became soworn out that the tireless and elastic ghouls were forced to aid him. All through the endlessclimb there lurked the peril of detection and pursuit; for though no gug dares lift the stonedoor to the forest because of the Great Ones’ curse, there are no such restraints concerningthe tower and the steps, and escaped ghasts are often chased even to the very top. So sharpare the ears of gugs, that the bare feet and hands of the climbers might readily be heard whenthe city awoke; and it would of course take but little time for the striding giants, accustomedfrom their ghast-hunts in the vaults of Zin to seeing without light, to overtake their smallerand slower quarry on those Cyclopean steps. It was very depressing to reflect that the silentpursuing gugs would not be heard at all, but would come very suddenly and shockingly in thedark upon the climbers. Nor could the traditional fear of gugs for ghouls be depended upon inthat peculiar place where the advantages lay so heavily with the gugs. There was also some perilfrom the furtive and venomous ghasts, which frequently hopped up into the tower during the sleephour of the gugs. If the gugs slept long, and the ghasts returned soon from their deed in thecavern, the scent of the climbers might easily be picked up by those loathsome and ill-disposedthings; in which case it would almost be better to be eaten by a gug.
Then, after aeons of climbing, there came a cough from the darkness above;and matters assumed a very grave and unexpected turn. It was clear that a ghast, or perhapseven more, had strayed into that tower before the coming of Carter and his guides; and it wasequally clear that this peril was very close. After a breathless second the leading ghoul pushedCarter to the wall and arranged his two kinsfolk in the best possible way, with the old slatetombstone raised for a crushing blow whenever the enemy might come in sight. Ghouls can seein the dark, so the party was not as badly off as Carter would have been alone. In another momentthe clatter of hooves revealed the downward hopping of at least one beast, and the slab-bearingghouls poised their weapon for a desperate blow. Presently two yellowish-red eyes flashed intoview, and the panting of the ghast became audible above its clattering. As it hopped down tothe step just above the ghouls, they wielded the ancient gravestone with prodigious force, sothat there was only a wheeze and a choking before the victim collapsed in a noxious heap. Thereseemed to be only this one animal, and after a moment of listening the ghouls tapped Carteras a signal to proceed again. As before, they were obliged to aid him; and he was glad to leavethat place of carnage where the ghast’s uncouth remains sprawled invisible in the blackness.
At last the ghouls brought their companion to a halt; and feeling above him,Carter realised that the great stone trap-door was reached at last. To open so vast a thingcompletely was not to be thought of, but the ghouls hoped to get it up just enough to slip thegravestone under as a prop, and permit Carter to escape through the crack. They themselves plannedto descend again and return through the city of the gugs, since their elusiveness was great,and they did not know the way overland to spectral Sarkomand with its lion-guarded gate to theabyss.
Mighty was the straining of those three ghouls at the stone of the door abovethem, and Carter helped push with as much strength as he had. They judged the edge next thetop of the staircase to be the right one, and to this they bent all the force of their disreputablynourished muscles. After a few moments a crack of light appeared; and Carter, to whom that taskhad been entrusted, slipped the end of the old gravestone in the aperture. There now ensueda mighty heaving; but progress was very slow, and they had of course to return to their firstposition every time they failed to turn the slab and prop the portal open.
Suddenly their desperation was magnified a thousandfold by a sound on the stepsbelow them. It was only the thumping and rattling of the slain ghast’s hooved body asit rolled down to lower levels; but of all the possible causes of that body’s dislodgmentand rolling, none was in the least reassuring. Therefore, knowing the ways of gugs, the ghoulsset to with something of a frenzy; and in a surprisingly short time had the door so high thatthey were able to hold it still whilst Carter turned the slab and left a generous opening. Theynow helped Carter through, letting him climb up to their rubbery shoulders and later guidinghis feet as he clutched at the blessed soil of the upper dreamland outside. Another second andthey were through themselves, knocking away the gravestone and closing the great trap-door whilea panting became audible beneath. Because of the Great Ones’ curse no gug might ever emergefrom that portal, so with a deep relief and sense of repose Carter lay quietly on the thickgrotesque fungi of the enchanted wood while his guides squatted near in the manner that ghoulsrest.
Weird as was that enchanted wood through which he had fared so long ago, itwas verily a haven and a delight after the gulfs he had now left behind. There was no livingdenizen about, for zoogs shun the mysterious door in fear, and Carter at once consulted withhis ghouls about their future course. To return through the tower they no longer dared, andthe waking world did not appeal to them when they learned that they must pass the priests Nashtand Kaman-Thah in the cavern of flame. So at length they decided to return through Sarkomandand its gate of the abyss, though of how to get there they knew nothing. Carter recalled thatit lies in the valley below Leng, and recalled likewise that he had seen in Dylath-Leen a sinister,slant-eyed old merchant reputed to trade on Leng. Therefore he advised the ghouls to seek outDylath-Leen, crossing the fields to Nir and the Skai and following the river to its mouth. Thisthey at once resolved to do, and lost no time in loping off, since the thickening of the duskpromised a full night ahead for travel. And Carter shook the paws of those repulsive beasts,thanking them for their help and sending his gratitude to the beast which once was Pickman;but could not help sighing with pleasure when they left. For a ghoul is a ghoul, and at bestan unpleasant companion for man. After that Carter sought a forest pool and cleansed himselfof the mud of nether earth, thereupon reassuming the clothes he had so carefully carried.
It was now night in that redoubtable wood of monstrous trees, but because ofthe phosphorescence one might travel as well as by day; wherefore Carter set out upon the well-knownroute toward Celephaïs, in Ooth-Nargai beyond the Tanarian Hills. And as he went he thoughtof the zebra he had left tethered to an ash tree on Ngranek in far-away Oriab so many aeonsago, and wondered if any lava-gatherer had fed and released it. And he wondered, too, if hewould ever return to Baharna and pay for the zebra that was slain by night in those ancientruins by Yath’s shore, and if the old tavern-keeper would remember him. Such were thethoughts that came to him in the air of the regained upper dreamland.
But presently his progress was halted by a sound from a very large hollow tree.He had avoided the great circle of stones, since he did not care to speak with zoogs just now;but it appeared from the singular fluttering in that huge tree that important councils werein session elsewhere. Upon drawing nearer he made out the accents of a tense and heated discussion;and before long became conscious of matters which he viewed with the greatest concern. For awar on the cats was under debate in that sovereign assembly of zoogs. It all came from the lossof the party which had sneaked after Carter to Ulthar, and which the cats had justly punishedfor unsuitable intentions. The matter had long rankled; and now, or within at least a month,the marshalled zoogs were about to strike the whole feline tribe in a series of surprise attacks,taking individual cats or groups of cats unawares, and giving not even the myriad cats of Ulthara proper chance to drill and mobilise. This was the plan of the zoogs, and Carter saw that hemust foil it before leaving on his mighty quest.
Very quietly therefore did Randolph Carter steal to the edge of the wood andsend the cry of the cat over the starlit fields. And a great grimalkin in a nearby cottage tookup the burden and relayed it across leagues of rolling meadow to warriors large and small, black,grey, tiger, white, yellow, and mixed; and it echoed through Nir and beyond the Skai even intoUlthar, and Ulthar’s numerous cats called in chorus and fell into a line of march. Itwas fortunate that the moon was not up, so that all the cats were on earth. Swiftly and silentlyleaping, they sprang from every hearth and housetop and poured in a great furry sea across theplains to the edge of the wood. Carter was there to greet them, and the sight of shapely, wholesomecats was indeed good for his eyes after the things he had seen and walked with in the abyss.He was glad to see his venerable friend and one-time rescuer at the head of Ulthar’s detachment,a collar of rank around his sleek neck, and whiskers bristling at a martial angle. Better still,as a sub-lieutenant in that army was a brisk young fellow who proved to be none other than thevery little kitten at the inn to whom Carter had given a saucer of rich cream on that long-vanishedmorning in Ulthar. He was a strapping and promising cat now, and purred as he shook hands withhis friend. His grandfather said he was doing very well in the army, and that he might wellexpect a captaincy after one more campaign.
Carter now outlined the peril of the cat tribe, and was rewarded by deep-throatedpurrs of gratitude from all sides. Consulting with the generals, he prepared a plan of instantaction which involved marching at once upon the zoog council and other known strongholds ofzoogs; forestalling their surprise attacks and forcing them to terms before the mobilisationof their army of invasion. Thereupon without a moment’s loss that great ocean of catsflooded the enchanted wood and surged around the council tree and the great stone circle. Flutteringsrose to panic pitch as the enemy saw the newcomers, and there was very little resistance amongthe furtive and curious brown zoogs. They saw that they were beaten in advance, and turned fromthoughts of vengeance to thoughts of present self-preservation.
Half the cats now seated themselves in a circular formation with the capturedzoogs in the centre, leaving open a lane down which were marched the additional captives roundedup by the other cats in other parts of the wood. Terms were discussed at length, Carter actingas interpreter, and it was decided that the zoogs might remain a free tribe on condition ofrendering to the cats a large annual tribute of grouse, quail, and pheasants from the less fabulousparts of their forest. Twelve young zoogs of noble families were taken as hostages to be keptin the Temple of the Cats at Ulthar, and the victors made it plain that any disappearances ofcats on the borders of the zoog domain would be followed by consequences highly disastrous tozoogs. These matters disposed of, the assembled cats broke ranks and permitted the zoogs toslink off one by one to their respective homes, which they hastened to do with many a sullenbackward glance.
The old cat general now offered Carter an escort through the forest to whateverborder he wished to reach, deeming it likely that the zoogs would harbour dire resentment againsthim for the frustration of their warlike enterprise. This offer he welcomed with gratitude;not only for the safety it afforded, but because he liked the graceful companionship of cats.So in the midst of a pleasant and playful regiment, relaxed after the successful performanceof its duty, Randolph Carter walked with dignity through that enchanted and phosphorescent woodof titan trees, talking of his quest with the old general and his grandson whilst others ofthe band indulged in fantastic gambols or chased fallen leaves that the wind drove among thefungi of the primeval floor. And the old cat said that he had heard much of unknown Kadath inthe cold waste, but did not know where it was. As for the marvellous sunset city, he had noteven heard of that, but would gladly relay to Carter anything he might later learn.
He gave the seeker some passwords of great value among the cats of dreamland,and commended him especially to the old chief of the cats in Celephaïs, whither he wasbound. That old cat, already slightly known to Carter, was a dignified Maltese; and would provehighly influential in any transaction. It was dawn when they came to the proper edge of thewood, and Carter bade his friends a reluctant farewell. The young sub-lieutenant he had metas a small kitten would have followed him had not the old general forbidden it, but that austerepatriarch insisted that the path of duty lay with the tribe and the army. So Carter set outalone over the golden fields that stretched mysterious beside a willow-fringed river, and thecats went back into the wood.
Well did the traveller know those garden lands that lie betwixt the wood and the Cerenerian Sea, and blithely did he follow the singing river Oukranos that marked his course.The sun rose higher over gentle slopes of grove and lawn, and heightened the colours of thethousand flowers that starred each knoll and dingle. A blessed haze lies upon all this region,wherein is held a little more of the sunlight than other places hold, and a little more of thesummer’s humming music of birds and bees; so that men walk through it as through a faeryplace, and feel greater joy and wonder than they ever afterward remember.
By noon Carter reached the jasper terraces of Kiran which slope down to theriver’s edge and bear that temple of loveliness wherein the King of Ilek-Vad comes fromhis far realm on the twilight sea once a year in a golden palanquin to pray to the god of Oukranos,who sang to him in youth when he dwelt in a cottage by its banks. All of jasper is that temple,and covering an acre of ground with its walls and courts, its seven pinnacled towers, and itsinner shrine where the river enters through hidden channels and the god sings softly in thenight. Many times the moon hears strange music as it shines on those courts and terraces andpinnacles, but whether that music be the song of the god or the chant of the cryptical priests,none but the King of Ilek-Vad may say; for only he has entered the temple or seen the priests.Now, in the drowsiness of day, that carven and delicate fane was silent, and Carter heard onlythe murmur of the great stream and the hum of the birds and bees as he walked onward under anenchanted sun.
All that afternoon the pilgrim wandered on through perfumed meadows and inthe lee of gentle riverward hills bearing peaceful thatched cottages and the shrines of amiablegods carven from jasper or chrysoberyl. Sometimes he walked close to the bank of Oukranos andwhistled to the sprightly and iridescent fish of that crystal stream, and at other times hepaused amidst the whispering rushes and gazed at the great dark wood on the farther side, whosetrees came down clear to the water’s edge. In former dreams he had seen quaint lumberingbuopoths come shyly out of that wood to drink, but now he could not glimpse any. Once in a whilehe paused to watch a carnivorous fish catch a fishing bird, which it lured to the water by shewingits tempting scales in the sun, and grasped by the beak with its enormous mouth as the wingedhunter sought to dart down upon it.
Toward evening he mounted a low grassy rise and saw before him flaming in thesunset the thousand gilded spires of Thran. Lofty beyond belief are the alabaster walls of thatincredible city, sloping inward toward the top and wrought in one solid piece by what meansno man knows, for they are more ancient than memory. Yet lofty as they are with their hundredgates and two hundred turrets, the clustered towers within, all white beneath their golden spires,are loftier still; so that men on the plain around see them soaring into the sky, sometimesshining clear, sometimes caught at the top in tangles of cloud and mist, and sometimes cloudedlower down with their utmost pinnacles blazing free above the vapours. And where Thran’sgates open on the river are great wharves of marble, with ornate galleons of fragrant cedarand calamander riding gently at anchor, and strange bearded sailors sitting on casks and baleswith the hieroglyphs of far places. Landward beyond the walls lies the farm country, where smallwhite cottages dream between little hills, and narrow roads with many stone bridges wind gracefullyamong streams and gardens.
Down through this verdant land Carter walked at evening, and saw twilight floatup from the river to the marvellous golden spires of Thran. And just at the hour of dusk hecame to the southern gate, and was stopped by a red-robed sentry till he had told three dreamsbeyond belief, and proved himself a dreamer worthy to walk up Thran’s steep mysteriousstreets and linger in bazaars where the wares of the ornate galleons were sold. Then into thatincredible city he walked; through a wall so thick that the gate was a tunnel, and thereafteramidst curved and undulant ways winding deep and narrow between the heavenward towers. Lightsshone through grated and balconied windows, and the sound of lutes and pipes stole timid frominner courts where marble fountains bubbled. Carter knew his way, and edged down through darkerstreets to the river, where at an old sea-tavern he found the captains and seamen he had knownin myriad other dreams. There he bought his passage to Celephaïs on a great green galleon,and there he stopped for the night after speaking gravely to the venerable cat of that inn,who blinked dozing before an enormous hearth and dreamed of old wars and forgotten gods.
In the morning Carter boarded the galleon bound for Celephaïs, and satin the prow as the ropes were cast off and the long sail down to the Cerenerian Sea began. Formany leagues the banks were much as they were above Thran, with now and then a curious templerising on the farther hills toward the right, and a drowsy village on the shore, with steepred roofs and nets spread in the sun. Mindful of his search, Carter questioned all the marinersclosely about those whom they had met in the taverns of Celephaïs, asking the names andways of the strange men with long, narrow eyes, long-lobed ears, thin noses, and pointed chinswho came in dark ships from the north and traded onyx for the carved jade and spun gold andlittle red singing birds of Celephaïs. Of these men the sailors knew not much, save thatthey talked but seldom and spread a kind of awe about them.
Their land, very far away, was called Inganok, and not many people cared togo thither because it was a cold twilight land, and said to be close to unpleasant Leng; althoughhigh impassable mountains towered on the side where Leng was thought to lie, so that none mightsay whether this evil plateau with its horrible stone villages and unmentionable monastery werereally there, or whether the rumour were only a fear that timid people felt in the night whenthose formidable barrier peaks loomed black against a rising moon. Certainly, men reached Lengfrom very different oceans. Of other boundaries of Inganok those sailors had no notion, norhad they heard of the cold waste and unknown Kadath save from vague unplaced report. And ofthe marvellous sunset city which Carter sought they knew nothing at all. So the traveller askedno more of far things, but bided his time till he might talk with those strange men from coldand twilight Inganok who are the seed of such gods as carved their features on Ngranek.
Late in the day the galleon reached those bends of the river which traversethe perfumed jungles of Kled. Here Carter wished he might disembark, for in those tropic tanglessleep wondrous palaces of ivory, lone and unbroken, where once dwelt fabulous monarchs of aland whose name is forgotten. Spells of the Elder Ones keep those places unharmed and undecayed,for it is written that there may one day be need of them again; and elephant caravans have glimpsedthem from afar by moonlight, though none dares approach them closely because of the guardiansto which their wholeness is due. But the ship swept on, and dusk hushed the hum of the day,and the first stars above blinked answers to the early fireflies on the banks as that junglefell far behind, leaving only its fragrance as a memory that it had been. And all through thenight that galleon floated on past mysteries unseen and unsuspected. Once a lookout reportedfires on the hills to the east, but the sleepy captain said they had better not be looked attoo much, since it was highly uncertain just who or what had lit them.
In the morning the river had broadened out greatly, and Carter saw by the housesalong the banks that they were close to the vast trading city of Hlanith on the Cerenerian Sea.Here the walls are of rugged granite, and the houses peakedly fantastic with beamed and plasteredgables. The men of Hlanith are more like those of the waking world than any others in dreamland;so that the city is not sought except for barter, but is prized for the solid work of its artisans.The wharves of Hlanith are of oak, and there the galleon made fast while the captain tradedin the taverns. Carter also went ashore, and looked curiously upon the rutted streets wherewooden ox-carts lumbered and feverish merchants cried their wares vacuously in the bazaars.The sea-taverns were all close to the wharves on cobbled lanes salt with the spray of high tides,and seemed exceedingly ancient with their low black-beamed ceilings and casements of greenishbull’s-eye panes. Ancient sailors in those taverns talked much of distant ports, and toldmany stories of the curious men from twilight Inganok, but had little to add to what the seamenof the galleon had told. Then, at last, after much unloading and loading, the ship set sailonce more over the sunset sea, and the high walls and gables of Hlanith grew less as the lastgolden light of day lent them a wonder and beauty beyond any that men had given them.
Two nights and two days the galleon sailed over the Cerenerian Sea, sightingno land and speaking but one other vessel. Then near sunset of the second day there loomed upahead the snowy peak of Aran with its gingko-trees swaying on the lower slopes, and Carter knewthat they were come to the land of Ooth-Nargai and the marvellous city of Celephaïs. Swiftlythere came into sight the glittering minarets of that fabulous town, and the untarnished marblewalls with their bronze statues, and the great stone bridge where Naraxa joins the sea. Thenrose the green gentle hills behind the town, with their groves and gardens of asphodels andthe small shrines and cottages upon them; and far in the background the purple ridge of theTanarians, potent and mystical, behind which lay forbidden ways into the waking world and towardother regions of dream.
The harbour was full of painted galleys, some of which were from the marblecloud-city of Serannian, that lies in ethereal space beyond where the sea meets the sky, andsome of which were from more substantial ports on the oceans of dreamland. Among these the steersmanthreaded his way up to the spice-fragrant wharves, where the galleon made fast in the dusk asthe city’s million lights began to twinkle out over the water. Ever new seemed this deathlesscity of vision, for here time has no power to tarnish or destroy. As it has always been is stillthe turquoise temple of Nath-Horthath, and the eighty orchid-wreathed priests are the same who buildedit ten thousand years ago. Shining still is the bronze of the great gates, nor are the onyxpavements ever worn or broken. And the great bronze statues on the walls look down on merchantsand camel drivers older than fable, yet without one grey hair in their forked beards.
Carter did not at once seek out the temple or the palace or the citadel, butstayed by the seaward wall among traders and sailors. And when it was too late for rumours andlegends he sought out an ancient tavern he knew well, and rested with dreams of the gods onunknown Kadath whom he sought. The next day he searched all along the quays for some of thestrange mariners of Inganok, but was told that none were now in port, their galley not beingdue from the north for full two weeks. He found, however, one Thorabonian sailor who had beento Inganok and had worked in the onyx quarries of that twilight place; and this sailor saidthere was certainly a desert to the north of the peopled region, which everybody seemed to fearand shun. The Thorabonian opined that this desert led around the utmost rim of impassable peaksinto Leng’s horrible plateau, and that this was why men feared it; though he admittedthere were other vague tales of evil presences and nameless sentinels. Whether or not this couldbe the fabled waste wherein unknown Kadath stands he did not know; but it seemed unlikely thatthose presences and sentinels, if indeed they truly existed, were stationed for naught.
On the following day Carter walked up the Street of the Pillars to the turquoisetemple and talked with the high-priest. Though Nath-Horthath is chiefly worshipped in Celephaïs,all the Great Ones are mentioned in diurnal prayers; and the priest was reasonably versed intheir moods. Like Atal in distant Ulthar, he strongly advised against any attempt to see them;declaring that they are testy and capricious, and subject to strange protection from the mindlessOther Gods from Outside, whose soul and messenger is the crawling chaos Nyarlathotep. Theirjealous hiding of the marvellous sunset city shewed clearly that they did not wish Carter toreach it, and it was doubtful how they would regard a guest whose object was to see them andplead before them. No man had ever found Kadath in the past, and it might be just as well ifnone ever found it in the future. Such rumours as were told about that onyx castle of the GreatOnes were not by any means reassuring.
Having thanked the orchid-crowned high-priest, Carter left the temple and soughtthe bazaar of the sheep-butchers, where the old chief of Celephaïs’ cats dwelt sleekand contented. That grey and dignified being was sunning himself on the onyx pavement, and extendeda languid paw as his caller approached. But when Carter repeated the passwords and introductionsfurnished him by the old cat general of Ulthar, the furry patriarch became very cordial and communicative;and told much of the secret lore known to cats on the seaward slopes of Ooth-Nargai. Best ofall, he repeated several things told him furtively by the timid waterfront cats of Celephaïsabout the men of Inganok, on whose dark ships no cat will go.
It seems that these men have an aura not of earth about them, though that isnot the reason why no cat will sail on their ships. The reason for this is that Inganok holdsshadows which no cat can endure, so that in all that cold twilight realm there is never a cheeringpurr or a homely mew. Whether it be because of things wafted over the impassable peaks fromhypothetical Leng, or because of things filtering down from the chilly desert to the north,none may say; but it remains a fact that in that far land there broods a hint of outer spacewhich cats do not like, and to which they are more sensitive than men. Therefore they will notgo on the dark ships that seek the basalt quays of Inganok.
The old chief of the cats also told him where to find his friend King Kuranes,who in Carter’s latter dreams had reigned alternately in the rose-crystal Palace of theSeventy Delights at Celephaïs and in the turreted cloud-castle of sky-floating Serannian.It seems that he could no more find content in those places, but had formed a mighty longingfor the English cliffs and downlands of his boyhood; where in little dreaming villages England’sold songs hover at evening behind lattice windows, and where grey church towers peep lovelythrough the verdure of distant valleys. He could not go back to these things in the waking worldbecause his body was dead; but he had done the next best thing and dreamed a small tract ofsuch countryside in the region east of the city, where meadows roll gracefully up from the sea-cliffsto the foot of the Tanarian Hills. There he dwelt in a grey Gothic manor-house of stone lookingon the sea, and tried to think it was ancient Trevor Towers, where he was born and where thirteengenerations of his forefathers had first seen the light. And on the coast nearby he had builta little Cornish fishing village with steep cobbled ways, settling therein such people as hadthe most English faces, and seeking ever to teach them the dear remembered accents of old Cornwallfishers. And in a valley not far off he had reared a great Norman Abbey whose tower he couldsee from his window, placing around it in the churchyard grey stones with the names of his ancestorscarved thereon, and with a moss somewhat like Old England’s moss. For though Kuranes wasa monarch in the land of dream, with all imagined pomps and marvels, splendours and beauties,ecstacies and delights, novelties and excitements at his command, he would gladly have resignedforever the whole of his power and luxury and freedom for one blessed day as a simple boy inthat pure and quiet England, that ancient, beloved England which had moulded his being and ofwhich he must always be immutably a part.
So when Carter bade that old grey chief of the cats adieu, he did not seekthe terraced palace of rose-crystal but walked out the eastern gate and across the daisied fieldstoward a peaked gable which he glimpsed through the oaks of a park sloping up to the sea-cliffs.And in time he came to a great hedge and a gate with a little brick lodge, and when he rangthe bell there hobbled to admit him no robed and anointed lackey of the palace, but a smallstubbly old man in a smock who spoke as best he could in the quaint tones of far Cornwall. AndCarter walked up the shady path between trees as near as possible to England’s trees,and climbed the terraces among gardens set out as in Queen Anne’s time. At the door, flankedby stone cats in the old way, he was met by a whiskered butler in suitable livery; and was presentlytaken to the library where Kuranes, Lord of Ooth-Nargai and the Sky around Serannian, sat pensivein a chair by the window looking on his little sea-coast village and wishing that his old nursewould come in and scold him because he was not ready for that hateful lawn-party at the vicar’s,with the carriage waiting and his mother nearly out of patience.
Kuranes, clad in a dressing-gown of the sort favoured by London tailors inhis youth, rose eagerly to meet his guest; for the sight of an Anglo-Saxon from the waking worldwas very dear to him, even if it was a Saxon from Boston, Massachusetts, instead of from Cornwall.And for long they talked of old times, having much to say because both were old dreamers andwell versed in the wonders of incredible places. Kuranes, indeed, had been out beyond the starsin the ultimate void, and was said to be the only one who had ever returned sane from such avoyage.
At length Carter brought up the subject of his quest, and asked of his hostthose questions he had asked of so many others. Kuranes did not know where Kadath was, or themarvellous sunset city; but he did know that the Great Ones were very dangerous creatures toseek out, and that the Other Gods had strange ways of protecting them from impertinent curiosity.He had learned much of the Other Gods in distant parts of space, especially in that region whereform does not exist, and coloured gases study the innermost secrets. The violet gas S’ngachad told him terrible things of the crawling chaos Nyarlathotep, and had warned him never toapproach the central void where the daemon-sultan Azathoth gnaws hungrily in the dark. Altogether,it was not well to meddle with the Elder Ones; and if they persistently denied all access tothe marvellous sunset city, it were better not to seek that city.
Kuranes furthermore doubted whether his guest would profit aught by comingto the city even were he to gain it. He himself had dreamed and yearned long years for lovelyCelephaïs and the land of Ooth-Nargai, and for the freedom and colour and high experienceof life devoid of its chains, conventions, and stupidities. But now that he was come into thatcity and that land, and was the king thereof, he found the freedom and the vividness all toosoon worn out, and monotonous for want of linkage with anything firm in his feelings and memories.He was a king in Ooth-Nargai, but found no meaning therein, and drooped always for the old familiarthings of England that had shaped his youth. All his kingdom would he give for the sound ofCornish church bells over the downs, and all the thousand minarets of Celephaïs for thesteep homely roofs of the village near his home. So he told his guest that the unknown sunsetcity might not hold quite the content he sought, and that perhaps it had better remain a gloriousand half-remembered dream. For he had visited Carter often in the old waking days, and knewwell the lovely New England slopes that had given him birth.
At the last, he was very certain, the seeker would long only for the earlyremembered scenes; the glow of Beacon Hill at evening, the tall steeples and winding hill streetsof quaint Kingsport, the hoary gambrel roofs of ancient and witch-haunted Arkham, and the blessedmiles of meads and valleys where stone walls rambled and white farmhouse gables peeped out frombowers of verdure. These things he told Randolph Carter, but still the seeker held to his purpose.And in the end they parted each with his own conviction, and Carter went back through the bronzegate into Celephaïs and down the Street of the Pillars to the old sea-wall, where he talkedmore with the mariners of far parts and waited for the dark ship from cold and twilight Inganok,whose strange-faced sailors and onyx-traders had in them the blood of the Great Ones.
One starlight evening when the Pharos shone splendid over the harbour the longed-forship put in, and strange-faced sailors and traders appeared one by one and group by group inthe ancient taverns along the sea-wall. It was very exciting to see again those living facesso like the godlike features on Ngranek, but Carter did not hasten to speak with the silentseamen. He did not know how much of pride and secrecy and dim supernal memory might fill thosechildren of the Great Ones, and was sure it would not be wise to tell them of his quest or asktoo closely of that cold desert stretching north of their twilight land. They talked littlewith the other folk in those ancient sea-taverns; but would gather in groups in remote cornersand sing among themselves the haunting airs of unknown places, or chant long tales to one anotherin accents alien to the rest of dreamland. And so rare and moving were those airs and tales,that one might guess their wonders from the faces of those who listened, even though the wordscame to common ears only as strange cadence and obscure melody.
For a week the strange seamen lingered in the taverns and traded in the bazaarsof Celephaïs, and before they sailed Carter had taken passage on their dark ship, tellingthem that he was an old onyx-miner and wishful to work in their quarries. That ship was verylovely and cunningly wrought, being of teakwood with ebony fittings and traceries of gold, andthe cabin in which the traveller lodged had hangings of silk and velvet. One morning at theturn of the tide the sails were raised and the anchor lifted, and as Carter stood on the highstern he saw the sunrise-blazing walls and bronze statues and golden minarets of ageless Celephaïssink into the distance, and the snowy peak of Mount Aran grow smaller and smaller. By noon therewas nothing in sight save the gentle blue of the Cerenerian Sea, with one painted galley afaroff bound for that cloud-hung realm of Serannian where the sea meets the sky.
And night came with gorgeous stars, and the dark ship steered for Charles’Wain and the Little Bear as they swung slowly round the pole. And the sailors sang strange songsof unknown places, and then stole off one by one to the forecastle while the wistful watchersmurmured old chants and leaned over the rail to glimpse the luminous fish playing in bowersbeneath the sea. Carter went to sleep at midnight, and rose in the glow of a young morning,marking that the sun seemed farther south than was its wont. And all through that second dayhe made progress in knowing the men of the ship, getting them little by little to talk of theircold twilight land, of their exquisite onyx city, and of their fear of the high and impassablepeaks beyond which Leng was said to be. They told him how sorry they were that no cats wouldstay in the land of Inganok, and how they thought the hidden nearness of Leng was to blame forit. Only of the stony desert to the north they would not talk. There was something disquietingabout that desert, and it was thought expedient not to admit its existence.
On later days they talked of the quarries in which Carter said he was goingto work. There were many of them, for all the city of Inganok was builded of onyx, whilst greatpolished blocks of it were traded in Rinar, Ogrothan, and Celephaïs, and at home with themerchants of Thraa, Ilarnek, and Kadatheron, for the beautiful wares of those fabulous ports.And far to the north, almost in that cold desert whose existence the men of Inganok did notcare to admit, there was an unused quarry greater than all the rest; from which had been hewnin forgotten times such prodigious lumps and blocks that the sight of their chiselled vacanciesstruck terror to all who beheld. Who had mined those incredible blocks, and whither they hadbeen transported, no man might say; but it was thought best not to trouble that quarry, aroundwhich such inhuman memories might conceivably cling. So it was left all alone in the twilight,with only the raven and the rumoured shantak-bird to brood on its immensities. When Carter heardof this quarry he was moved to deep thought, for he knew from old tales that the Great Ones’castle atop unknown Kadath is of onyx.
Each day the sun wheeled lower and lower in the sky, and the mists overheadgrew thicker and thicker. And in two weeks there was not any sunlight at all, but only a weirdgrey twilight shining through a dome of eternal cloud by day, and a cold starless phosphorescencefrom the under side of that cloud by night. On the twentieth day a great jagged rock in thesea was sighted from afar, the first land glimpsed since Aran’s snowy peak had dwindledbehind the ship. Carter asked the captain the name of that rock, but was told that it had noname and had never been sought by any vessel because of the sounds that came from it at night.And when, after dark, a dull and ceaseless howling arose from that jagged granite place, thetraveller was glad that no stop had been made, and that the rock had no name. The seamen prayedand chanted till the noise was out of earshot, and Carter dreamed terrible dreams within dreamsin the small hours.
Two mornings after that there loomed far ahead and to the east a line of greatgrey peaks whose tops were lost in the changeless clouds of that twilight world. And at thesight of them the sailors sang glad songs, and some knelt down on the deck to pray; so thatCarter knew they were come to the land of Inganok and would soon be moored to the basalt quaysof the great town bearing that land’s name. Toward noon a dark coast-line appeared, andbefore three o’clock there stood out against the north the bulbous domes and fantasticspires of the onyx city. Rare and curious did that archaic city rise above its walls and quays,all of delicate black with scrolls, flutings, and arabesques of inlaid gold. Tall and many-windowedwere the houses, and carved on every side with flowers and patterns whose dark symmetries dazzledthe eye with a beauty more poignant than light. Some ended in swelling domes that tapered toa point, others in terraced pyramids whereon rose clustered minarets displaying every phaseof strangeness and imagination. The walls were low, and pierced by frequent gates, each undera great arch rising high above the general level and capped by the head of a god chiselled withthat same skill displayed in the monstrous face on distant Ngranek. On a hill in the centrerose a sixteen-angled tower greater than all the rest and bearing a high pinnacled belfry restingon a flattened dome. This, the seamen said, was the Temple of the Elder Ones, and was ruledby an old high-priest sad with inner secrets.
At intervals the clang of a strange bell shivered over the onyx city, answeredeach time by a peal of mystic music made up of horns, viols, and chanting voices. And from arow of tripods on a gallery round the high dome of the temple there burst flares of flame atcertain moments; for the priests and people of that city were wise in the primal mysteries,and faithful in keeping the rhythms of the Great Ones as set forth in scrolls older than thePnakotic Manuscripts. As the ship rode past the great basalt breakwater into the harbour thelesser noises of the city grew manifest, and Carter saw the slaves, sailors, and merchants onthe docks. The sailors and merchants were of the strange-faced race of the gods, but the slaveswere squat, slant-eyed folk said by rumour to have drifted somehow across or around the impassablepeaks from valleys beyond Leng. The wharves reached wide outside the city wall and bore uponthem all manner of merchandise from the galleys anchored there, while at one end were greatpiles of onyx both carved and uncarved awaiting shipment to the far markets of Rinar, Ogrothan,and Celephaïs.
It was not yet evening when the dark ship anchored beside a jutting quay ofstone, and all the sailors and traders filed ashore and through the arched gate into the city.The streets of that city were paved with onyx, and some of them were wide and straight whilstothers were crooked and narrow. The houses near the water were lower than the rest, and boreabove their curiously arched doorways certain signs of gold said to be in honour of the respectivesmall gods that favoured each. The captain of the ship took Carter to an old sea-tavern whereflocked the mariners of quaint countries, and promised that he would next day shew him the wondersof the twilight city, and lead him to the taverns of the onyx-miners by the northern wall. Andevening fell, and little bronze lamps were lighted, and the sailors in that tavern sang songsof remote places. But when from its high tower the great bell shivered over the city, and thepeal of the horns and viols and voices rose cryptical in answer thereto, all ceased their songsor tales and bowed silent till the last echo died away. For there is a wonder and a strangenesson the twilight city of Inganok, and men fear to be lax in its rites lest a doom and a vengeancelurk unsuspectedly close.
Far in the shadows of that tavern Carter saw a squat form he did not like,for it was unmistakably that of the old slant-eyed merchant he had seen so long before in thetaverns of Dylath-Leen, who was reputed to trade with the horrible stone villages of Leng whichno healthy folk visit and whose evil fires are seen at night from afar, and even to have dealtwith that high-priest not to be described, which wears a yellow silken mask over its face anddwells all alone in a prehistoric stone monastery. This man had seemed to shew a queer gleamof knowing when Carter asked the traders of Dylath-Leen about the cold waste and Kadath; andsomehow his presence in dark and haunted Inganok, so close to the wonders of the north, wasnot a reassuring thing. He slipped wholly out of sight before Carter could speak to him, andsailors later said that he had come with a yak caravan from some point not well determined,bearing the colossal and rich-flavoured eggs of the rumoured shantak-bird to trade for the dexterousjade goblets that merchants brought from Ilarnek.
On the following morning the ship-captain led Carter through the onyx streetsof Inganok, dark under their twilight sky. The inlaid doors and figured house-fronts, carvenbalconies and crystal-paned oriels, all gleamed with a sombre and polished loveliness; and nowand then a plaza would open out with black pillars, colonnades, and the statues of curious beingsboth human and fabulous. Some of the vistas down long and unbending streets, or through sidealleys and over bulbous domes, spires, and arabesqued roofs, were weird and beautiful beyondwords; and nothing was more splendid than the massive height of the great central Temple ofthe Elder Ones with its sixteen carven sides, its flattened dome, and its lofty pinnacled belfry,overtopping all else, and majestic whatever its foreground. And always to the east, far beyondthe city walls and the leagues of pasture land, rose the gaunt grey sides of those topless andimpassable peaks across which hideous Leng was said to lie.
The captain took Carter to the mighty temple, which is set with its walledgarden in a great round plaza whence the streets go as spokes from a wheel’s hub. Theseven arched gates of that garden, each having over it a carven face like those on the city’sgates, are always open; and the people roam reverently at will down the tiled paths and throughthe little lanes lined with grotesque termini and the shrines of modest gods. And there arefountains, pools, and basins there to reflect the frequent blaze of the tripods on the highbalcony, all of onyx and having in them small luminous fish taken by divers from the lower bowersof ocean. When the deep clang from the temple’s belfry shivers over the garden and thecity, and the answer of the horns and viols and voices peals out from the seven lodges by thegarden gates, there issue from the seven doors of the temple long columns of masked and hoodedpriests in black, bearing at arm’s length before them great golden bowls from which acurious steam rises. And all the seven columns strut peculiarly in single file, legs thrown farforward without bending the knees, down the walks that lead to the seven lodges, wherein theydisappear and do not appear again. It is said that subterrene paths connect the lodges withthe temple, and that the long files of priests return through them; nor is it unwhispered thatdeep flights of onyx steps go down to mysteries that are never told. But only a few are thosewho hint that the priests in the masked and hooded columns are not human priests.
Carter did not enter the temple, because none but the Veiled King is permittedto do that. But before he left the garden the hour of the bell came, and he heard the shiveringclang deafeningly above him, and the wailing of the horns and viols and voices loud from thelodges by the gates. And down the seven great walks stalked the long files of bowl-bearing priestsin their singular way, giving to the traveller a fear which human priests do not often give.When the last of them had vanished he left that garden, noting as he did so a spot on the pavementover which the bowls had passed. Even the ship-captain did not like that spot, and hurried himon toward the hill whereon the Veiled King’s palace rises many-domed and marvellous.
The ways to the onyx palace are steep and narrow, all but that broad curvingone where the king and his companions ride on yaks or in yak-drawn chariots. Carter and hisguide climbed up an alley that was all steps, between inlaid walls bearing strange signs ingold, and under balconies and oriels whence sometimes floated soft strains of music or breathsof exotic fragrance. Always ahead loomed those titan walls, mighty buttresses, and clusteredand bulbous domes for which the Veiled King’s palace is famous; and at length they passedunder a great black arch and emerged in the gardens of the monarch’s pleasure. There Carterpaused in faintness at so much of beauty; for the onyx terraces and colonnaded walks, the gayparterres and delicate flowering trees espaliered to golden lattices, the brazen urns and tripodswith cunning bas-reliefs, the pedestalled and almost breathing statues of veined black marble,the basalt-bottomed lagoons and tiled fountains with luminous fish, the tiny temples of iridescentsinging birds atop carven columns, the marvellous scrollwork of the great bronze gates, andthe blossoming vines trained along every inch of the polished walls all joined to form a sightwhose loveliness was beyond reality, and half-fabulous even in the land of dream. There it shimmeredlike a vision under that grey twilight sky, with the domed and fretted magnificence of the palaceahead, and the fantastic silhouette of the distant impassable peaks on the right. And ever thesmall birds and the fountains sang, while the perfume of rare blossoms spread like a veil overthat incredible garden. No other human presence was there, and Carter was glad it was so. Thenthey turned and descended again the onyx alley of steps, for the palace itself no visitor mayenter; and it is not well to look too long and steadily at the great central dome, since itis said to house the archaic father of all the rumoured shantak-birds, and to send out queerdreams to the curious.
After that the captain took Carter to the north quarter of the town, near theGate of the Caravans, where are the taverns of the yak-merchants and the onyx-miners. And there,in a low-ceiled inn of quarrymen, they said farewell; for business called the captain whilstCarter was eager to talk with miners about the north. There were many men in that inn, and thetraveller was not long in speaking to some of them; saying that he was an old miner of onyx,and anxious to know somewhat of Inganok’s quarries. But all that he learnt was not muchmore than he knew before, for the miners were timid and evasive about the cold desert to thenorth and the quarry that no man visits. They had fears of fabled emissaries from around themountains where Leng is said to lie, and of evil presences and nameless sentinels far northamong the scattered rocks. And they whispered also that the rumoured shantak-birds are no wholesomethings; it being indeed for the best that no man has ever truly seen one (for that fabled fatherof shantaks in the king’s dome is fed in the dark).
The next day, saying that he wished to look over all the various mines forhimself and to visit the scattered farms and quaint onyx villages of Inganok, Carter hired ayak and stuffed great leathern saddle-bags for a journey. Beyond the Gate of the Caravans theroad lay straight betwixt tilled fields, with many odd farmhouses crowned by low domes. At someof these houses the seeker stopped to ask questions; once finding a host so austere and reticent,and so full of an unplaced majesty like to that in the huge features on Ngranek, that he feltcertain he had come at last upon one of the Great Ones themselves, or upon one with full nine-tenthsof their blood, dwelling amongst men. And to that austere and reticent cotter he was carefulto speak very well of the gods, and to praise all the blessings they had ever accorded him.
That night Carter camped in a roadside meadow beneath a great lygath-tree towhich he tied his yak, and in the morning resumed his northward pilgrimage. At about ten o’clockhe reached the small-domed village of Urg, where traders rest and miners tell their tales, andpaused in its taverns till noon. It is here that the great caravan road turns west toward Selarn,but Carter kept on north by the quarry road. All the afternoon he followed that rising road,which was somewhat narrower than the great highway, and which now led through a region withmore rocks than tilled fields. And by evening the low hills on his left had risen into sizeableblack cliffs, so that he knew he was close to the mining country. All the while the great gauntsides of the impassable mountains towered afar off at his right, and the farther he went, theworse tales he heard of them from the scattered farmers and traders and drivers of lumberingonyx-carts along the way.
On the second night he camped in the shadow of a large black crag, tetheringhis yak to a stake driven in the ground. He observed the greater phosphorescence of the cloudsat this northerly point, and more than once thought he saw dark shapes outlined against them.And on the third morning he came in sight of the first onyx quarry, and greeted the men whothere laboured with picks and chisels. Before evening he had passed eleven quarries; the landbeing here given over altogether to onyx cliffs and boulders, with no vegetation at all, butonly great rocky fragments scattered about a floor of black earth, with the grey impassablepeaks always rising gaunt and sinister on his right. The third night he spent in a camp of quarrymen whose flickering fires cast weird reflections on the polished cliffs to the west. And theysang many songs and told many tales, shewing such strange knowledge of the olden days and thehabits of gods that Carter could see they held many latent memories of their sires the GreatOnes. They asked him whither he went, and cautioned him not to go too far to the north; buthe replied that he was seeking new cliffs of onyx, and would take no more risks than were commonamong prospectors. In the morning he bade them adieu and rode on into the darkening north, wherethey had warned him he would find the feared and unvisited quarry whence hands older than men’shands had wrenched prodigious blocks. But he did not like it when, turning back to wave a lastfarewell, he thought he saw approaching the camp that squat and evasive old merchant with slantingeyes, whose conjectured traffick with Leng was the gossip of distant Dylath-Leen.
After two more quarries the inhabited part of Inganok seemed to end, and theroad narrowed to a steeply rising yak-path among forbidding black cliffs. Always on the righttowered the gaunt and distant peaks, and as Carter climbed farther and farther into this untraversedrealm he found it grew darker and colder. Soon he perceived that there were no prints of feetor hooves on the black path beneath, and realised that he was indeed come into strange and desertedways of elder time. Once in a while a raven would croak far overhead, and now and then a flappingbehind some vast rock would make him think uncomfortably of the rumoured shantak-bird. But inthe main he was alone with his shaggy steed, and it troubled him to observe that this excellentyak become more and more reluctant to advance, and more and more disposed to snort affrightedlyat any small noise along the route.
The path now contracted between sable and glistening walls, and began to displayan even greater steepness than before. It was a bad footing, and the yak often slipped on thestony fragments strown thickly about. In two hours Carter saw ahead a definite crest, beyondwhich was nothing but dull grey sky, and blessed the prospect of a level or downward course.To reach this crest, however, was no easy task; for the way had grown nearly perpendicular,and was perilous with loose black gravel and small stones. Eventually Carter dismounted andled his dubious yak; pulling very hard when the animal balked or stumbled, and keeping his ownfooting as best he might. Then suddenly he came to the top and saw beyond, and gasped at whathe saw.
The path indeed led straight ahead and slightly down, with the same lines ofhigh natural walls as before; but on the left hand there opened out a monstrous space, vastacres in extent, where some archaic power had riven and rent the native cliffs of onyx in theform of a giants’ quarry. Far back into the solid precipice ran that Cyclopean gouge,and deep down within earth’s bowels its lower delvings yawned. It was no quarry of man,and the concave sides were scarred with great squares yards wide which told of the size of theblocks once hewn by nameless hands and chisels. High over its jagged rim huge ravens flappedand croaked, and vague whirrings in the unseen depths told of bats or urhags or less mentionablepresences haunting the endless blackness. There Carter stood in the narrow way amidst the twilightwith the rocky path sloping down before him; tall onyx cliffs on his right that led on as faras he could see, and tall cliffs on the left chopped off just ahead to make that terrible andunearthly quarry.
All at once the yak uttered a cry and burst from his control, leaping pasthim and darting on in a panic till it vanished down the narrow slope toward the north. Stoneskicked by its flying hooves fell over the brink of the quarry and lost themselves in the darkwithout any sound of striking bottom; but Carter ignored the perils of that scanty path as heraced breathlessly after the flying steed. Soon the left-hand cliffs resumed their course, makingthe way once more a narrow lane; and still the traveller leaped on after the yak whose greatwide prints told of its desperate flight.
Once he thought he heard the hoofbeats of the frightened beast, and doubledhis speed from this encouragement. He was covering miles, and little by little the way was broadeningin front till he knew he must soon emerge on the cold and dreaded desert to the north. The gauntgrey flanks of the distant impassable peaks were again visible above the right-hand crags, andahead were the rocks and boulders of an open space which was clearly a foretaste of the darkand limitless plain. And once more those hoofbeats sounded in his ears, plainer than before,but this time giving terror instead of encouragement because he realised that they were notthe frightened hoofbeats of his fleeing yak. These beats were ruthless and purposeful, and theywere behind him.
Carter’s pursuit of the yak became now a flight from an unseen thing,for though he dared not glance over his shoulder he felt that the presence behind him couldbe nothing wholesome or mentionable. His yak must have heard or felt it first, and he did notlike to ask himself whether it had followed him from the haunts of men or had floundered upout of that black quarry pit. Meanwhile the cliffs had been left behind, so that the oncomingnight fell over a great waste of sand and spectral rocks wherein all paths were lost. He couldnot see the hoofprints of his yak, but always from behind him there came that detestable clopping;mingled now and then with what he fancied were titanic flappings and whirrings. That he waslosing ground seemed unhappily clear to him, and he knew he was hopelessly lost in this brokenand blasted desert of meaningless rocks and untravelled sands. Only those remote and impassablepeaks on the right gave him any sense of direction, and even they were less clear as the greytwilight waned and the sickly phosphorescence of the clouds took its place.
Then dim and misty in the darkling north before him he glimpsed a terriblething. He had thought it for some moments a range of black mountains, but now he saw it wassomething more. The phosphorescence of the brooding clouds shewed it plainly, and even silhouettedparts of it as low vapours glowed behind. How distant it was he could not tell, but it musthave been very far. It was thousands of feet high, stretching in a great concave arc from thegrey impassable peaks to the unimagined westward spaces, and had once indeed been a ridge ofmighty onyx hills. But now those hills were hills no more, for some hand greater than man’shad touched them. Silent they squatted there atop the world like wolves or ghouls, crowned withclouds and mists and guarding the secrets of the north forever. All in a great half circle theysquatted, those dog-like mountains carven into monstrous watching statues, and their right handswere raised in menace against mankind.
It was only the flickering light of the clouds that made their mitred doubleheads seem to move, but as Carter stumbled on he saw arise from their shadowy laps great formswhose motions were no delusion. Winged and whirring, those forms grew larger each moment, andthe traveller knew his stumbling was at an end. They were not any birds or bats known elsewhereon earth or in dreamland, for they were larger than elephants and had heads like a horse’s.Carter knew that they must be the shantak-birds of ill rumour, and wondered no more what evilguardians and nameless sentinels made men avoid the boreal rock desert. And as he stopped infinal resignation he dared at last to look behind him; where indeed was trotting the squat slant-eyedtrader of evil legend, grinning astride a lean yak and leading on a noxious horde of leeringshantaks to whose wings still clung the rime and nitre of the nether pits.
Trapped though he was by fabulous and hippocephalic winged nightmares thatpressed around in great unholy circles, Randolph Carter did not lose consciousness. Lofty andhorrible those titan gargoyles towered above him, while the slant-eyed merchant leaped downfrom his yak and stood grinning before the captive. Then the man motioned Carter to mount oneof the repugnant shantaks, helping him up as his judgment struggled with his loathing. It washard work ascending, for the shantak-bird has scales instead of feathers, and those scales arevery slippery. Once he was seated, the slant-eyed man hopped up behind him, leaving the leanyak to be led away northward toward the ring of carven mountains by one of the incredible birdcolossi.
There now followed a hideous whirl through frigid space, endlessly up and eastwardtoward the gaunt grey flanks of those impassable mountains beyond which Leng was said to lie.Far above the clouds they flew, till at last there lay beneath them those fabled summits whichthe folk of Inganok have never seen, and which lie always in high vortices of gleaming mist.Carter beheld them very plainly as they passed below, and saw upon their topmost peaks strangecaves which made him think of those on Ngranek; but he did not question his captor about thesethings when he noticed that both the man and the horse-headed shantak appeared oddly fearfulof them, hurrying past nervously and shewing great tension until they were left far in the rear.
The shantak now flew lower, revealing beneath the canopy of cloud a grey barrenplain whereon at great distances shone little feeble fires. As they descended there appearedat intervals lone huts of granite and bleak stone villages whose tiny windows glowed with pallidlight. And there came from those huts and villages a shrill droning of pipes and a nauseousrattle of crotala which proved at once that Inganok’s people are right in their geographickrumours. For travellers have heard such sounds before, and know that they float only from thecold desert plateau which healthy folk never visit; that haunted place of evil and mystery whichis Leng.
Around the feeble fires dark forms were dancing, and Carter was curious asto what manner of beings they might be; for no healthy folk have ever been to Leng, and theplace is known only by its fires and stone huts as seen from afar. Very slowly and awkwardlydid those forms leap, and with an insane twisting and bending not good to behold; so that Carterdid not wonder at the monstrous evil imputed to them by vague legend, or the fear in which alldreamland holds their abhorrent frozen plateau. As the shantak flew lower, the repulsivenessof the dancers became tinged with a certain hellish familiarity; and the prisoner kept straininghis eyes and racking his memory for clues to where he had seen such creatures before.
They leaped as though they had hooves instead of feet, and seemed to wear asort of wig or headpiece with small horns. Of other clothing they had none, but most of themwere quite furry. Behind they had dwarfish tails, and when they glanced upward he saw the excessivewidth of their mouths. Then he knew what they were, and that they did not wear any wigs or headpiecesafter all. For the cryptic folk of Leng were of one race with the uncomfortable merchants ofthe black galleys that traded rubies at Dylath-Leen; those not quite human merchants who arethe slaves of the monstrous moon-things! They were indeed the same dark folk who had shanghaiedCarter on their noisome galley so long ago, and whose kith he had seen driven in herds aboutthe unclean wharves of that accursed lunar city, with the leaner ones toiling and the fatterones taken away in crates for other needs of their polypous and amorphous masters. Now he sawwhere such ambiguous creatures came from, and shuddered at the thought that Leng must be knownto these formless abominations from the moon.
But the shantak flew on past the fires and the stone huts and the less thanhuman dancers, and soared over sterile hills of grey granite and dim wastes of rock and iceand snow. Day came, and the phosphorescence of low clouds gave place to the misty twilight ofthat northern world, and still the vile bird winged meaningly through the cold and silence.At times the slant-eyed man talked with his steed in a hateful and guttural language, and theshantak would answer with tittering tones that rasped like the scratching of ground glass. Allthis while the land was getting higher, and finally they came to a windswept table-land whichseemed the very roof of a blasted and tenantless world. There, all alone in the hush and thedusk and the cold, rose the uncouth stones of a squat windowless building, around which a circleof crude monoliths stood. In all this arrangement there was nothing human, and Carter surmisedfrom old tales that he was indeed come to that most dreadful and legendary of all places, theremote and prehistoric monastery wherein dwells uncompanioned the high-priest not to be described,which wears a yellow silken mask over its face and prays to the Other Gods and their crawlingchaos Nyarlathotep.
The loathsome bird now settled to the ground, and the slant-eyed man hoppeddown and helped his captive alight. Of the purpose of his seizure Carter now felt very sure;for clearly the slant-eyed merchant was an agent of the darker powers, eager to drag beforehis masters a mortal whose presumption had aimed at the finding of unknown Kadath and the sayingof a prayer before the faces of the Great Ones in their onyx castle. It seemed likely that thismerchant had caused his former capture by the slaves of the moon-things in Dylath-Leen, andthat he now meant to do what the rescuing cats had baffled; taking the victim to some dreadrendezvous with monstrous Nyarlathotep and telling with what boldness the seeking of unknownKadath had been tried. Leng and the cold waste north of Inganok must be close to the Other Gods,and there the passes to Kadath are well guarded.
The slant-eyed man was small, but the great hippocephalic bird was there tosee he was obeyed; so Carter followed where he led, and passed within the circle of standingrocks and into the low arched doorway of that windowless stone monastery. There were no lightsinside, but the evil merchant lit a small clay lamp bearing morbid bas-reliefs and prodded hisprisoner on through mazes of narrow winding corridors. On the walls of the corridors were paintedfrightful scenes older than history, and in a style unknown to the archaeologists of earth.After countless aeons their pigments were brilliant still, for the cold and dryness of hideousLeng keep alive many primal things. Carter saw them fleetingly in the rays of that dim and movinglamp, and shuddered at the tale they told. 
Through those archaic frescoes Leng’s annals stalked; and the horned,hooved, and wide-mouthed almost-humans danced evilly amidst forgotten cities. There were scenesof old wars, wherein Leng’s almost-humans fought with the bloated purple spiders of theneighbouring vales; and there were scenes also of the coming of the black galleys from the moon,and of the submission of Leng’s people to the polypous and amorphous blasphemies thathopped and floundered and wriggled out of them. Those slippery greyish-white blasphemies theyworshipped as gods, nor ever complained when scores of their best and fatted males were takenaway in the black galleys. The monstrous moon-beasts made their camp on a jagged isle in thesea, and Carter could tell from the frescoes that this was none other than the lone namelessrock he had seen when sailing to Inganok; that grey accursed rock which Inganok’s seamenshun, and from which vile howlings reverberate all through the night.
And in those frescoes was shewn the great seaport and capital of the almost-humans;proud and pillared betwixt the cliffs and the basalt wharves, and wondrous with high fanes andcarven places. Great gardens and columned streets led from the cliffs and from each of the sixsphinx-crowned gates to a vast central plaza, and in that plaza was a pair of winged colossallions guarding the top of a subterrene staircase. Again and again were those huge winged lionsshewn, their mighty flanks of diorite glistening in the grey twilight of the day and the cloudyphosphorescence of the night. And as Carter stumbled past their frequent and repeated picturesit came to him at last what indeed they were, and what city it was that the almost-humans hadruled so anciently before the coming of the black galleys. There could be no mistake, for thelegends of dreamland are generous and profuse. Indubitably that primal city was no less a placethan storied Sarkomand, whose ruins had bleached for a million years before the first true humansaw the light, and whose twin titan lions guard eternally the steps that lead down from dreamlandto the Great Abyss.
Other views shewed the gaunt grey peaks dividing Leng from Inganok, and themonstrous shantak-birds that build nests on the ledges half way up. And they shewed likewisethe curious caves near the very topmost pinnacles, and how even the boldest of the shantaksfly screaming away from them. Carter had seen those caves when he passed over them, and hadnoticed their likeness to the caves on Ngranek. Now he knew that the likeness was more thana chance one, for in these pictures were shewn their fearsome denizens; and those bat-wings,curving horns, barbed tails, prehensile paws, and rubbery bodies were not strange to him. Hehad met those silent, flitting, and clutching creatures before; those mindless guardians ofthe Great Abyss whom even the Great Ones fear, and who own not Nyarlathotep but hoary Nodensas their lord. For they were the dreaded night-gaunts, who never laugh or smile because theyhave no faces, and who flop unendingly in the dark betwixt the Vale of Pnath and the passesto the outer world.
The slant-eyed merchant had now prodded Carter into a great domed space whosewalls were carved in shocking bas-reliefs, and whose centre held a gaping circular pit surroundedby six malignly stained stone altars in a ring. There was no light in this vast and evil-smellingcrypt, and the small lamp of the sinister merchant shone so feebly that one could grasp detailsonly little by little. At the farther end was a high stone dais reached by five steps; and thereon a golden throne sat a lumpish figure robed in yellow silk figured with red and having a yellowsilken mask over its face. To this being the slant-eyed man made certain signs with his hands,and the lurker in the dark replied by raising a disgustingly carven flute of ivory in silk-coveredpaws and blowing certain loathsome sounds from beneath its flowing yellow mask. This colloquywent on for some time, and to Carter there was something sickeningly familiar in the sound ofthat flute and the stench of the malodorous place. It made him think of a frightful red-littencity and of the revolting procession that once filed through it; of that, and of an awful climbthrough lunar countryside beyond, before the rescuing rush of earth’s friendly cats. Heknew that the creature on the dais was without doubt the high-priest not to be described, ofwhich legend whispers such fiendish and abnormal possibilities, but he feared to think justwhat that abhorred high-priest might be.
Then the figured silk slipped a trifle from one of the greyish-white paws,and Carter knew what the noisome high-priest was. And in that hideous second stark fear drovehim to something his reason would never have dared to attempt, for in all his shaken consciousnessthere was room only for one frantic will to escape from what squatted on that golden throne.He knew that hopeless labyrinths of stone lay betwixt him and the cold table-land outside, andthat even on that table-land the noxious shantak still waited; yet in spite of all this therewas in his mind only the instant need to get away from that wriggling, silk-robed monstrosity.
The slant-eyed man had set his curious lamp upon one of the high and wickedlystained altar-stones by the pit, and had moved forward somewhat to talk to the high-priest withhis hands. Carter, hitherto wholly passive, now gave that man a terrific push with all the wildstrength of fear, so that the victim toppled at once into that gaping well which rumour holdsto reach down to the hellish Vaults of Zin where gugs hunt ghasts in the dark. In almost thesame second he seized the lamp from the altar and darted out into the frescoed labyrinths, racingthis way and that as chance determined and trying not to think of the stealthy padding of shapelesspaws on the stones behind him, or of the silent wrigglings and crawlings which must be goingon back there in lightless corridors.
After a few moments he regretted his thoughtless haste, and wished he had triedto follow backward the frescoes he had passed on the way in. True, they were so confused andduplicated that they could not have done him much good, but he wished none the less he had madethe attempt. Those he now saw were even more horrible than those he had seen then, and he knewhe was not in the corridors leading outside. In time he became quite sure he was not followed,and slackened his pace somewhat; but scarce had he breathed in half-relief when a new perilbeset him. His lamp was waning, and he would soon be in pitch blackness with no means of sightor guidance.
When the light was all gone he groped slowly in the dark, and prayed to theGreat Ones for such help as they might afford. At times he felt the stone floor sloping up ordown, and once he stumbled over a step for which no reason seemed to exist. The farther he wentthe damper it seemed to be, and when he was able to feel a junction or the mouth of a side passagehe always chose the way which sloped downward the least. He believed, though, that his generalcourse was down; and the vault-like smell and incrustations on the greasy walls and floor alikewarned him he was burrowing deep in Leng’s unwholesome table-land. But there was not anywarning of the thing which came at last; only the thing itself with its terror and shock andbreath-taking chaos. One moment he was groping slowly over the slippery floor of an almost levelplace, and the next he was shooting dizzily downward in the dark through a burrow which musthave been well-nigh vertical.
Of the length of that hideous sliding he could never be sure, but it seemedto take hours of delirious nausea and ecstatic frenzy. Then he realised he was still, with thephosphorescent clouds of a northern night shining sickly above him. All around were crumblingwalls and broken columns, and the pavement on which he lay was pierced by straggling grass andwrenched asunder by frequent shrubs and roots. Behind him a basalt cliff rose topless and perpendicular;its dark side sculptured into repellent scenes, and pierced by an arched and carven entranceto the inner blacknesses out of which he had come. Ahead stretched double rows of pillars, andthe fragments and pedestals of pillars, that spoke of a broad and bygone street; and from theurns and basins along the way he knew it had been a great street of gardens. Far off at itsend the pillars spread to mark a vast round plaza, and in that open circle there loomed giganticunder the lurid night clouds a pair of monstrous things. Huge winged lions of diorite they were,with blackness and shadow between them. Full twenty feet they reared their grotesque and unbrokenheads, and snarled derisive on the ruins around them. And Carter knew right well what they mustbe, for legend tells of only one such twain. They were the changeless guardians of the GreatAbyss, and these dark ruins were in truth primordial Sarkomand.
Carter’s first act was to close and barricade the archway in the cliffwith fallen blocks and odd debris that lay around. He wished no follower from Leng’s hatefulmonastery, for along the way ahead would lurk enough of other dangers. Of how to get from Sarkomandto the peopled parts of dreamland he knew nothing at all; nor could he gain much by descendingto the grottoes of the ghouls, since he knew they were no better informed than he. The threeghouls which had helped him through the city of gugs to the outer world had not known how toreach Sarkomand in their journey back, but had planned to ask old traders in Dylath-Leen. Hedid not like to think of going again to the subterrene world of gugs and risking once more thathellish tower of Koth with its Cyclopean steps leading to the enchanted wood, yet he felt hemight have to try this course if all else failed. Over Leng’s plateau past the lone monasteryhe dared not go unaided; for the high-priest’s emissaries must be many, while at the journey’send there would no doubt be the shantaks and perhaps other things to deal with. If he couldget a boat he might sail back to Inganok past the jagged and hideous rock in the sea, for theprimal frescoes in the monastery labyrinth had shewn that this frightful place lies not farfrom Sarkomand’s basalt quays. But to find a boat in this aeon-deserted city was no probablething, and it did not appear likely that he could ever make one.
Such were the thoughts of Randolph Carter when a new impression began beatingupon his mind. All this while there had stretched before him the great corpse-like width offabled Sarkomand with its black broken pillars and crumbling sphinx-crowned gates and titanstones and monstrous winged lions against the sickly glow of those luminous night clouds. Nowhe saw far ahead and on the right a glow that no clouds could account for, and knew he was notalone in the silence of that dead city. The glow rose and fell fitfully, flickering with a greenishtinge which did not reassure the watcher. And when he crept closer, down the littered streetand through some narrow gaps between tumbled walls, he perceived that it was a campfire nearthe wharves with many vague forms clustered darkly around it, and a lethal odour hanging heavilyover all. Beyond was the oily lapping of the harbour water with a great ship riding at anchor,and Carter paused in stark terror when he saw that the ship was indeed one of the dreaded blackgalleys from the moon.
Then, just as he was about to creep back from that detestable flame, he sawa stirring among the vague dark forms and heard a peculiar and unmistakable sound. It was thefrightened meeping of a ghoul, and in a moment it had swelled to a veritable chorus of anguish.Secure as he was in the shadow of monstrous ruins, Carter allowed his curiosity to conquer hisfear, and crept forward again instead of retreating. Once in crossing an open street he wriggledworm-like on his stomach, and in another place he had to rise to his feet to avoid making anoise among heaps of fallen marble. But always he succeeded in avoiding discovery, so that ina short time he had found a spot behind a titan pillar whence he could watch the whole green-littenscene of action. There, around a hideous fire fed by the obnoxious stems of lunar fungi, theresquatted a stinking circle of the toad-like moon-beasts and their almost-human slaves. Someof these slaves were heating curious iron spears in the leaping flames, and at intervals applyingtheir white-hot points to three tightly trussed prisoners that lay writhing before the leadersof the party. From the motions of their tentacles Carter could see that the blunt-snouted moon-beastswere enjoying the spectacle hugely, and vast was his horror when he suddenly recognised thefrantic meeping and knew that the tortured ghouls were none other than the faithful trio whichhad guided him safely from the abyss and had thereafter set out from the enchanted wood to findSarkomand and the gate to their native deeps.
The number of malodorous moon-beasts about that greenish fire was very great,and Carter saw that he could do nothing now to save his former allies. Of how the ghouls hadbeen captured he could not guess; but fancied that the grey toad-like blasphemies had heardthem inquire in Dylath-Leen concerning the way to Sarkomand and had not wished them to approachso closely the hateful plateau of Leng and the high-priest not to be described. For a momenthe pondered on what he ought to do, and recalled how near he was to the gate of the ghouls’black kingdom. Clearly it was wisest to creep east to the plaza of twin lions and descend atonce to the gulf, where assuredly he would meet no horrors worse than those above, and wherehe might soon find ghouls eager to rescue their brethren and perhaps to wipe out the moon-beastsfrom the black galley. It occurred to him that the portal, like other gates to the abyss, mightbe guarded by flocks of night-gaunts; but he did not fear these faceless creatures now. He hadlearned that they are bound by solemn treaties with the ghouls, and the ghoul which was Pickmanhad taught him how to glibber a password they understood.
So Carter began another silent crawl through the ruins, edging slowly towardthe great central plaza and the winged lions. It was ticklish work, but the moon-beasts werepleasantly busy and did not hear the slight noises which he twice made by accident among thescattered stones. At last he reached the open space and picked his way among the stunted treesand briers that had grown up therein. The gigantic lions loomed terrible above him in the sicklyglow of the phosphorescent night clouds, but he manfully persisted toward them and presentlycrept round to their faces, knowing it was on that side he would find the mighty darkness whichthey guard. Ten feet apart crouched the mocking-faced beasts of diorite, brooding on Cyclopeanpedestals whose sides were chiselled into fearsome bas-reliefs. Betwixt them was a tiled courtwith a central space which had once been railed with balusters of onyx. Midway in this spacea black well opened, and Carter soon saw that he had indeed reached the yawning gulf whose crustedand mouldy stone steps lead down to the crypts of nightmare.
Terrible is the memory of that dark descent, in which hours wore themselvesaway whilst Carter wound sightlessly round and round down a fathomless spiral of steep and slipperystairs. So worn and narrow were the steps, and so greasy with the ooze of inner earth, thatthe climber never quite knew when to expect a breathless fall and hurtling down to the ultimatepits; and he was likewise uncertain just when or how the guardian night-gaunts would suddenlypounce upon him, if indeed there were any stationed in this primeval passage. All about himwas a stifling odour of nether gulfs, and he felt that the air of these choking depths was notmade for mankind. In time he became very numb and somnolent, moving more from automatic impulsethan from reasoned will; nor did he realise any change when he stopped moving altogether assomething quietly seized him from behind. He was flying very rapidly through the air beforea malevolent tickling told him that the rubbery night-gaunts had performed their duty.
Awaked to the fact that he was in the cold, damp clutch of the faceless flutterers,Carter remembered the password of the ghouls and glibbered it as loudly as he could amidst thewind and chaos of flight. Mindless though night-gaunts are said to be, the effect was instantaneous;for all tickling stopped at once, and the creatures hastened to shift their captive to a morecomfortable position. Thus encouraged, Carter ventured some explanations; telling of the seizureand torture of three ghouls by the moon-beasts, and of the need of assembling a party to rescuethem. The night-gaunts, though inarticulate, seemed to understand what was said; and shewedgreater haste and purpose in their flight. Suddenly the dense blackness gave place to the greytwilight of inner earth, and there opened up ahead one of those flat sterile plains on whichghouls love to squat and gnaw. Scattered tombstones and osseous fragments told of the denizensof that place; and as Carter gave a loud meep of urgent summons, a score of burrows emptiedforth their leathery, dog-like tenants. The night-gaunts now flew low and set their passengerupon his feet, afterward withdrawing a little and forming a hunched semicircle on the groundwhile the ghouls greeted the newcomer.
Carter glibbered his message rapidly and explicitly to the grotesque company,and four of them at once departed through different burrows to spread the news to others andgather such troops as might be available for the rescue. After a long wait a ghoul of some importanceappeared, and made significant signs to the night-gaunts, causing two of the latter to fly offinto the dark. Thereafter there were constant accessions to the hunched flock of night-gauntson the plain, till at length the slimy soil was fairly black with them. Meanwhile fresh ghoulscrawled out of the burrows one by one, all glibbering excitedly and forming in crude battlearray not far from the huddled night-gaunts. In time there appeared that proud and influentialghoul which was once the artist Richard Pickman of Boston, and to him Carter glibbered a veryfull account of what had occurred. The erstwhile Pickman, surprised to greet his ancient friendagain, seemed very much impressed, and held a conference with other chiefs a little apart fromthe growing throng.
Finally, after scanning the ranks with care, the assembled chiefs all meepedin unison and began glibbering orders to the crowds of ghouls and night-gaunts. A large detachmentof the horned flyers vanished at once, while the rest grouped themselves two by two on theirknees with extended fore legs, awaiting the approach of the ghouls one by one. As each ghoulreached the pair of night-gaunts to which he was assigned, he was taken up and borne away intothe blackness; till at last the whole throng had vanished save for Carter, Pickman, and theother chiefs, and a few pairs of night-gaunts. Pickman explained that night-gaunts are the advanceguard and battle steeds of the ghouls, and that the army was issuing forth to Sarkomand to dealwith the moon-beasts. Then Carter and the ghoulish chiefs approached the waiting bearers andwere taken up by the damp, slippery paws. Another moment and all were whirling in wind and darkness;endlessly up, up, up to the gate of the winged lions and the spectral ruins of primal Sarkomand.
When, after a great interval, Carter saw again the sickly light of Sarkomand’snocturnal sky, it was to behold the great central plaza swarming with militant ghouls and night-gaunts.Day, he felt sure, must be almost due; but so strong was the army that no surprise of the enemywould be needed. The greenish flare near the wharves still glimmered faintly, though the absenceof ghoulish meeping shewed that the torture of the prisoners was over for the nonce. Softlyglibbering directions to their steeds, and to the flock of riderless night-gaunts ahead, theghouls presently rose in wide whirring columns and swept on over the bleak ruins toward theevil flame. Carter was now beside Pickman in the front rank of ghouls, and saw as they approachedthe noisome camp that the moon-beasts were totally unprepared. The three prisoners lay boundand inert beside the fire, while their toad-like captors slumped drowsily about in no certainorder. The almost-human slaves were asleep, even the sentinels shirking a duty which in thisrealm must have seemed to them merely perfunctory.
The final swoop of the night-gaunts and mounted ghouls was very sudden, eachof the greyish toad-like blasphemies and their almost-human slaves being seized by a group ofnight-gaunts before a sound was made. The moon-beasts, of course, were voiceless; and even theslaves had little chance to scream before rubbery paws choked them into silence. Horrible werethe writhings of those great jellyish abnormalities as the sardonic night-gaunts clutched them,but nothing availed against the strength of those black prehensile talons. When a moon-beastwrithed too violently, a night-gaunt would seize and pull its quivering pink tentacles; whichseemed to hurt so much that the victim would cease its struggles. Carter expected to see muchslaughter, but found that the ghouls were far subtler in their plans. They glibbered certainsimple orders to the night-gaunts which held the captives, trusting the rest to instinct; andsoon the hapless creatures were borne silently away into the Great Abyss, to be distributedimpartially amongst the bholes, gugs, ghasts, and other dwellers in darkness whose modes ofnourishment are not painless to their chosen victims. Meanwhile the three bound ghouls had beenreleased and consoled by their conquering kinsfolk, whilst various parties searched the neighbourhoodfor possible remaining moon-beasts, and boarded the evil-smelling black galley at the wharfto make sure that nothing had escaped the general defeat. Surely enough, the capture had beenthorough; for not a sign of further life could the victors detect. Carter, anxious to preservea means of access to the rest of dreamland, urged them not to sink the anchored galley; andthis request was freely granted out of gratitude for his act in reporting the plight of thecaptured trio. On the ship were found some very curious objects and decorations, some of whichCarter cast at once into the sea.
Ghouls and night-gaunts now formed themselves in separate groups, the formerquestioning their rescued fellows anent past happenings. It appeared that the three had followedCarter’s directions and proceeded from the enchanted wood to Dylath-Leen by way of Nirand the Skai, stealing human clothes at a lonely farmhouse and loping as closely as possiblein the fashion of a man’s walk. In Dylath-Leen’s taverns their grotesque ways andfaces had aroused much comment; but they had persisted in asking the way to Sarkomand untilat last an old traveller was able to tell them. Then they knew that only a ship for Lelag-Lengwould serve their purpose, and prepared to wait patiently for such a vessel.
But evil spies had doubtless reported much; for shortly a black galley putinto port, and the wide-mouthed ruby merchants invited the ghouls to drink with them in a tavern.Wine was produced from one of those sinister bottles grotesquely carven from a single ruby,and after that the ghouls found themselves prisoners on the black galley as Carter had oncefound himself. This time, however, the unseen rowers steered not for the moon but for antiqueSarkomand; bent evidently on taking their captives before the high-priest not to be described.They had touched at the jagged rock in the northern sea which Inganok’s mariners shun,and the ghouls had there seen for the first time the real masters of the ship; being sickeneddespite their own callousness by such extremes of malign shapelessness and fearsome odour. There,too, were witnessed the nameless pastimes of the toad-like resident garrison—such pastimesas give rise to the night-howlings which men fear. After that had come the landing at ruinedSarkomand and the beginning of the tortures, whose continuance the present rescue had prevented.
Future plans were next discussed, the three rescued ghouls suggesting a raidon the jagged rock and the extermination of the toad-like garrison there. To this, however,the night-gaunts objected; since the prospect of flying over water did not please them. Mostof the ghouls favoured the design, but were at a loss how to follow it without the help of thewinged night-gaunts. Thereupon Carter, seeing that they could not navigate the anchored galley,offered to teach them the use of the great banks of oars; to which proposal they eagerly assented.Grey day had now come, and under that leaden northern sky a picked detachment of ghouls filedinto the noisome ship and took their seats on the rowers’ benches. Carter found them fairlyapt at learning, and before night had risked several experimental trips around the harbour.Not till three days later, however, did he deem it safe to attempt the voyage of conquest. Then,the rowers trained and the night-gaunts safely stowed in the forecastle, the party set sailat last; Pickman and the other chiefs gathering on deck and discussing modes of approach andprocedure.
On the very first night the howlings from the rock were heard. Such was theirtimbre that all the galley’s crew shook visibly; but most of all trembled the three rescuedghouls who knew precisely what those howlings meant. It was not thought best to attempt an attackby night, so the ship lay to under the phosphorescent clouds to wait for the dawn of a greyishday. When the light was ample and the howlings still the rowers resumed their strokes, and thegalley drew closer and closer to that jagged rock whose granite pinnacles clawed fantasticallyat the dull sky. The sides of the rock were very steep; but on ledges here and there could beseen the bulging walls of queer windowless dwellings, and the low railings guarding travelledhigh roads. No ship of men had ever come so near the place, or at least, had never come so nearand departed again; but Carter and the ghouls were void of fear and kept inflexibly on, roundingthe eastern face of the rock and seeking the wharves which the rescued trio described as beingon the southern side within a harbour formed of steep headlands.
The headlands were prolongations of the island proper, and came so closelytogether that only one ship at a time might pass between them. There seemed to be no watcherson the outside, so the galley was steered boldly through the flume-like strait and into thestagnant foetid harbour beyond. Here, however, all was bustle and activity; with several shipslying at anchor along a forbidding stone quay, and scores of almost-human slaves and moon-beastsby the waterfront handling crates and boxes or driving nameless and fabulous horrors hitchedto lumbering lorries. There was a small stone town hewn out of the vertical cliff above thewharves, with the start of a winding road that spiralled out of sight toward higher ledges ofthe rock. Of what lay inside that prodigious peak of granite none might say, but the thingsone saw on the outside were far from encouraging.
At sight of the incoming galley the crowds on the wharves displayed much eagerness;those with eyes staring intently, and those without eyes wriggling their pink tentacles expectantly.They did not, of course, realise that the black ship had changed hands; for ghouls look muchlike the horned and hooved almost-humans, and the night-gaunts were all out of sight below.By this time the leaders had fully formed a plan; which was to loose the night-gaunts as soonas the wharf was touched, and then to sail directly away, leaving matters wholly to the instinctsof those almost mindless creatures. Marooned on the rock, the horned flyers would first of allseize whatever living things they found there, and afterward, quite helpless to think exceptin terms of the homing instinct, would forget their fear of water and fly swiftly back to theabyss; bearing their noisome prey to appropriate destinations in the dark, from which not muchwould emerge alive.
The ghoul that was Pickman now went below and gave the night-gaunts their simpleinstructions, while the ship drew very near to the ominous and malodorous wharves. Presentlya fresh stir rose along the waterfront, and Carter saw that the motions of the galley had begunto excite suspicion. Evidently the steersman was not making for the right dock, and probablythe watchers had noticed the difference between the hideous ghouls and the almost-human slaveswhose places they were taking. Some silent alarm must have been given, for almost at once ahorde of the mephitic moon-beasts began to pour from the little black doorways of the windowlesshouses and down the winding road at the right. A rain of curious javelins struck the galleyas the prow hit the wharf, felling two ghouls and slightly wounding another; but at this pointall the hatches were thrown open to emit a black cloud of whirring night-gaunts which swarmedover the town like a flock of horned and Cyclopean bats.
The jellyish moon-beasts had procured a great pole and were trying to pushoff the invading ship, but when the night-gaunts struck them they thought of such things nomore. It was a very terrible spectacle to see those faceless and rubbery ticklers at their pastime,and tremendously impressive to watch the dense cloud of them spreading through the town andup the winding roadway to the reaches above. Sometimes a group of the black flutterers woulddrop a toad-like prisoner from aloft by mistake, and the manner in which the victim would burstwas highly offensive to the sight and smell. When the last of the night-gaunts had left thegalley the ghoulish leaders glibbered an order of withdrawal, and the rowers pulled quietlyout of the harbour between the grey headlands while still the town was a chaos of battle andconquest.
The Pickman ghoul allowed several hours for the night-gaunts to make up theirrudimentary minds and overcome their fear of flying over the sea, and kept the galley standingabout a mile off the jagged rock while he waited and dressed the wounds of the injured men.Night fell, and the grey twilight gave place to the sickly phosphorescence of low clouds, andall the while the leaders watched the high peaks of that accursed rock for signs of the night-gaunts’flight. Toward morning a black speck was seen hovering timidly over the topmost pinnacle, andshortly afterward the speck had become a swarm. Just before daybreak the swarm seemed to scatter,and within a quarter of an hour it had vanished wholly in the distance toward the northeast.Once or twice something seemed to fall from the thinning swarm into the sea; but Carter didnot worry, since he knew from observation that the toad-like moon-beasts cannot swim. At length,when the ghouls were satisfied that all the night-gaunts had left for Sarkomand and the GreatAbyss with their doomed burdens, the galley put back into the harbour betwixt the grey headlands;and all the hideous company landed and roamed curiously over the denuded rock with its towersand eyries and fortresses chiselled from the solid stone.
Frightful were the secrets uncovered in those evil and windowless crypts; forthe remnants of unfinished pastimes were many, and in various stages of departure from theirprimal state. Carter put out of the way certain things which were after a fashion alive, andfled precipitately from a few other things about which he could not be very positive. The stench-filledhouses were furnished mostly with grotesque stools and benches carven from moon-trees, and werepainted inside with nameless and frantic designs. Countless weapons, implements, and ornamentslay about; including some large idols of solid ruby depicting singular beings not found on theearth. These latter did not, despite their material, invite either appropriation or long inspection;and Carter took the trouble to hammer five of them into very small pieces. The scattered spearsand javelins he collected, and with Pickman’s approval distributed among the ghouls. Suchdevices were new to the dog-like lopers, but their relative simplicity made them easy to masterafter a few concise hints.
The upper parts of the rock held more temples than private homes, and in numeroushewn chambers were found terrible carven altars and doubtfully stained fonts and shrines forthe worship of things more monstrous than the mild gods atop Kadath. From the rear of one greattemple stretched a low black passage which Carter followed far into the rock with a torch tillhe came to a lightless domed hall of vast proportions, whose vaultings were covered with daemoniaccarvings and in whose centre yawned a foul and bottomless well like that in the hideous monasteryof Leng where broods alone the high-priest not to be described. On the distant shadowy side,beyond the noisome well, he thought he discerned a small door of strangely wrought bronze; butfor some reason he felt an unaccountable dread of opening it or even approaching it, and hastenedback through the cavern to his unlovely allies as they shambled about with an ease and abandonhe could scarcely feel. The ghouls had observed the unfinished pastimes of the moon-beasts,and had profited in their fashion. They had also found a hogshead of potent moon-wine, and wererolling it down to the wharves for removal and later use in diplomatic dealings, though therescued trio, remembering its effect on them in Dylath-Leen, had warned their company to tastenone of it. Of rubies from lunar mines there was a great store, both rough and polished, inone of the vaults near the water; but when the ghouls found they were not good to eat they lostall interest in them. Carter did not try to carry any away, since he knew too much about thosewhich had mined them.
Suddenly there came an excited meeping from the sentries on the wharves, andall the loathsome foragers turned from their tasks to stare seaward and cluster round the waterfront.Betwixt the grey headlands a fresh black galley was rapidly advancing, and it could be but amoment before the almost-humans on deck would perceive the invasion of the town and give thealarm to the monstrous things below. Fortunately the ghouls still bore the spears and javelinswhich Carter had distributed amongst them; and at his command, sustained by the being that wasPickman, they now formed a line of battle and prepared to prevent the landing of the ship. Presentlya burst of excitement on the galley told of the crew’s discovery of the changed stateof things, and the instant stoppage of the vessel proved that the superior numbers of the ghoulshad been noted and taken into account. After a moment of hesitation the newcomers silently turnedand passed out between the headlands again, but not for an instant did the ghouls imagine thatthe conflict was averted. Either the dark ship would seek reinforcements, or the crew wouldtry to land elsewhere on the island; hence a party of scouts was at once sent up toward thepinnacle to see what the enemy’s course would be.
In a very few minutes a ghoul returned breathless to say that the moon-beastsand almost-humans were landing on the outside of the more easterly of the rugged grey headlands,and ascending by hidden paths and ledges which a goat could scarcely tread in safety. Almostimmediately afterward the galley was sighted again through the flume-like strait, but only fora second. Then, a few moments later, a second messenger panted down from aloft to say that anotherparty was landing on the other headland; both being much more numerous than the size of thegalley would seem to allow for. The ship itself, moving slowly with only one sparsely mannedtier of oars, soon hove in sight betwixt the cliffs, and lay to in the foetid harbour as ifto watch the coming fray and stand by for any possible use.
By this time Carter and Pickman had divided the ghouls into three parties,one to meet each of the two invading columns and one to remain in the town. The first two atonce scrambled up the rocks in their respective directions, while the third was subdivided intoa land party and a sea party. The sea party, commanded by Carter, boarded the anchored galleyand rowed out to meet the undermanned galley of the newcomers; whereat the latter retreatedthrough the strait to the open sea. Carter did not at once pursue it, for he knew he might beneeded more acutely near the town.
Meanwhile the frightful detachments of the moon-beasts and almost-humans hadlumbered up to the top of the headlands and were shockingly silhouetted on either side againstthe grey twilight sky. The thin hellish flutes of the invaders had now begun to whine, and thegeneral effect of those hybrid, half-amorphous processions was as nauseating as the actual odourgiven off by the toad-like lunar blasphemies. Then the two parties of the ghouls swarmed intosight and joined the silhouetted panorama. Javelins began to fly from both sides, and the swellingmeeps of the ghouls and the bestial howls of the almost-humans gradually joined the hellishwhine of the flutes to form a frantick and indescribable chaos of daemon cacophony. Now andthen bodies fell from the narrow ridges of the headlands into the sea outside or the harbourinside, in the latter case being sucked quickly under by certain submarine lurkers whose presencewas indicated only by prodigious bubbles.
For half an hour this dual battle raged in the sky, till upon the west cliffthe invaders were completely annihilated. On the east cliff, however, where the leader of themoon-beast party appeared to be present, the ghouls had not fared so well; and were slowly retreatingto the slopes of the pinnacle proper. Pickman had quickly ordered reinforcements for this frontfrom the party in the town, and these had helped greatly in the earlier stages of the combat.Then, when the western battle was over, the victorious survivors hastened across to the aidof their hard-pressed fellows; turning the tide and forcing the invaders back again along thenarrow ridge of the headland. The almost-humans were by this time all slain, but the last ofthe toad-like horrors fought desperately with the great spears clutched in their powerful anddisgusting paws. The time for javelins was now nearly past, and the fight became a hand-to-handcontest of what few spearmen could meet upon that narrow ridge.
As fury and recklessness increased, the number falling into the sea becamevery great. Those striking the harbour met nameless extinction from the unseen bubblers, butof those striking the open sea some were able to swim to the foot of the cliffs and land ontidal rocks, while the hovering galley of the enemy rescued several moon-beasts. The cliffswere unscalable except where the monsters had debarked, so that none of the ghouls on the rockscould rejoin their battle-line. Some were killed by javelins from the hostile galley or fromthe moon-beasts above, but a few survived to be rescued. When the security of the land partiesseemed assured, Carter’s galley sallied forth between the headlands and drove the hostileship far out to sea; pausing to rescue such ghouls as were on the rocks or still swimming inthe ocean. Several moon-beasts washed on rocks or reefs were speedily put out of the way.
Finally, the moon-beasts’ galley being safely in the distance and theinvading land army concentrated in one place, Carter landed a considerable force on the easternheadland in the enemy’s rear; after which the fight was short-lived indeed. Attacked fromboth sides, the noisome flounderers were rapidly cut to pieces or pushed into the sea, tillby evening the ghoulish chiefs agreed that the island was again clear of them. The hostile galley,meanwhile, had disappeared; and it was decided that the evil jagged rock had better be evacuatedbefore any overwhelming horde of lunar horrors might be assembled and brought against the victors.
So by night Pickman and Carter assembled all the ghouls and counted them withcare, finding that over a fourth had been lost in the day’s battles. The wounded wereplaced on bunks in the galley, for Pickman always discouraged the old ghoulish custom of killingand eating one’s own wounded, and the able-bodied troops were assigned to the oars orto such other places as they might most usefully fill. Under the low phosphorescent clouds ofnight the galley sailed, and Carter was not sorry to be departing from that island of unwholesomesecrets, whose lightless domed hall with its bottomless well and repellent bronze door lingeredrestlessly in his fancy. Dawn found the ship in sight of Sarkomand’s ruined quays of basalt,where a few night-gaunt sentries still waited, squatting like black horned gargoyles on thebroken columns and crumbling sphinxes of that fearful city which lived and died before the yearsof man.
The ghouls made camp amongst the fallen stones of Sarkomand, despatching amessenger for enough night-gaunts to serve them as steeds. Pickman and the other chiefs wereeffusive in their gratitude for the aid Carter had lent them; and Carter now began to feel thathis plans were indeed maturing well, and that he would be able to command the help of thesefearsome allies not only in quitting this part of dreamland, but in pursuing his ultimate questfor the gods atop unknown Kadath, and the marvellous sunset city they so strangely withheldfrom his slumbers. Accordingly he spoke of these things to the ghoulish leaders; telling whathe knew of the cold waste wherein Kadath stands and of the monstrous shantaks and the mountainscarven into double-headed images which guard it. He spoke of the fear of shantaks for night-gaunts,and of how the vast hippocephalic birds fly screaming from the black burrows high up on thegaunt grey peaks that divide Inganok from hateful Leng. He spoke, too, of the things he hadlearnt concerning night-gaunts from the frescoes in the windowless monastery of the high-priestnot to be described; how even the Great Ones fear them, and how their ruler is not the crawlingchaos Nyarlathotep at all, but hoary and immemorial Nodens, Lord of the Great Abyss.
All these things Carter glibbered to the assembled ghouls, and presently outlinedthat request which he had in mind, and which he did not think extravagant considering the serviceshe had so lately rendered the rubbery, dog-like lopers. He wished very much, he said, for theservices of enough night-gaunts to bear him safely through the air past the realm of shantaksand carven mountains, and up into the cold waste beyond the returning tracks of any other mortal.He desired to fly to the onyx castle atop unknown Kadath in the cold waste to plead with theGreat Ones for the sunset city they denied him, and felt sure that the night-gaunts could takehim thither without trouble; high above the perils of the plain, and over the hideous doubleheads of those carven sentinel mountains that squat eternally in the grey dusk. For the hornedand faceless creatures there could be no danger from aught of earth, since the Great Ones themselvesdread them. And even were unexpected things to come from the Other Gods, who are prone to overseethe affairs of earth’s milder gods, the night-gaunts need not fear; for the outer hellsare indifferent matters to such silent and slippery flyers as own not Nyarlathotep for theirmaster, but bow only to potent and archaic Nodens.
A flock of ten or fifteen night-gaunts, Carter glibbered, would surely be enoughto keep any combination of shantaks at a distance; though perhaps it might be well to have someghouls in the party to manage the creatures, their ways being better known to their ghoulishallies than to men. The party could land him at some convenient point within whatever wallsthat fabulous onyx citadel might have, waiting in the shadows for his return or his signal whilsthe ventured inside the castle to give prayer to the gods of earth. If any ghouls chose to escorthim into the throne-room of the Great Ones, he would be thankful, for their presence would addweight and importance to his plea. He would not, however, insist upon this but merely wishedtransportation to and from the castle atop unknown Kadath; the final journey being either tothe marvellous sunset city itself, in case the gods proved favourable, or back to the earthwardGate of Deeper Slumber in the enchanted wood in case his prayers were fruitless.
Whilst Carter was speaking all the ghouls listened with great attention, andas the moments advanced the sky became black with clouds of those night-gaunts for which messengershad been sent. The winged horrors settled in a semicircle around the ghoulish army, waitingrespectfully as the dog-like chieftains considered the wish of the earthly traveller. The ghoulthat was Pickman glibbered gravely with its fellows, and in the end Carter was offered far morethan he had at most expected. As he had aided the ghouls in their conquest of the moon-beasts,so would they aid him in his daring voyage to realms whence none had ever returned; lendinghim not merely a few of their allied night-gaunts, but their entire army as they encamped, veteranfighting ghouls and newly assembled night-gaunts alike, save only a small garrison for the capturedblack galley and such spoils as had come from the jagged rock in the sea. They would set outthrough the air whenever he might wish, and once arrived on Kadath a suitable train of ghoulswould attend him in state as he placed his petition before earth’s gods in their onyxcastle.
Moved by a gratitude and satisfaction beyond words, Carter made plans withthe ghoulish leaders for his audacious voyage. The army would fly high, they decided, over hideousLeng with its nameless monastery and wicked stone villages; stopping only at the vast grey peaksto confer with the shantak-frightening night-gaunts whose burrows honeycombed their summits.They would then, according to what advice they might receive from those denizens, choose theirfinal course; approaching unknown Kadath either through the desert of carven mountains northof Inganok, or through the more northerly reaches of repulsive Leng itself. Dog-like and soullessas they are, the ghouls and night-gaunts had no dread of what those untrodden deserts mightreveal; nor did they feel any deterring awe at the thought of Kadath towering lone with itsonyx castle of mystery.
About midday the ghouls and night-gaunts prepared for flight, each ghoul selectinga suitable pair of horned steeds to bear him. Carter was placed well up toward the head of thecolumn beside Pickman, and in front of the whole a double line of riderless night-gaunts wasprovided as a vanguard. At a brisk meep from Pickman the whole shocking army rose in a nightmarecloud above the broken columns and crumbling sphinxes of primordial Sarkomand; higher and higher,till even the great basalt cliff behind the town was cleared, and the cold, sterile table-landof Leng’s outskirts laid open to sight. Still higher flew the black host, till even thistable-land grew small beneath them; and as they worked northward over the windswept plateauof horror Carter saw once again with a shudder the circle of crude monoliths and the squat windowlessbuilding which he knew held that frightful silken-masked blasphemy from whose clutches he hadso narrowly escaped. This time no descent was made as the army swept bat-like over the sterilelandscape, passing the feeble fires of the unwholesome stone villages at a great altitude, andpausing not at all to mark the morbid twistings of the hooved, horned almost-humans that danceand pipe eternally therein. Once they saw a shantak-bird flying low over the plain, but whenit saw them it screamed noxiously and flapped off to the north in grotesque panic. 
At dusk they reached the jagged grey peaks that form the barrier of Inganok,and hovered about those strange caves near the summits which Carter recalled as so frightfulto the shantaks. At the insistent meeping of the ghoulish leaders there issued forth from eachlofty burrow a stream of horned black flyers; with which the ghouls and night-gaunts ofthe party conferred at length by means of ugly gestures. It soon became clear that the bestcourse would be that over the cold waste north of Inganok, for Leng’s northward reachesare full of unseen pitfalls that even the night-gaunts dislike; abysmal influences centringin certain white hemispherical buildings on curious knolls, which common folklore associatesunpleasantly with the Other Gods and their crawling chaos Nyarlathotep.
Of Kadath the flutterers of the peaks knew almost nothing, save that theremust be some mighty marvel toward the north, over which the shantaks and the carven mountainsstand guard. They hinted at rumoured abnormalities of proportion in those trackless leaguesbeyond, and recalled vague whispers of a realm where night broods eternally; but of definitedata they had nothing to give. So Carter and his party thanked them kindly; and, crossing thetopmost granite pinnacles to the skies of Inganok, dropped below the level of the phosphorescentnight clouds and beheld in the distance those terrible squatting gargoyles that were mountainstill some titan hand carved fright into their virgin rock.
There they squatted, in a hellish half-circle, their legs on the desert sandand their mitres piercing the luminous clouds; sinister, wolf-like, and double-headed, withfaces of fury and right hands raised, dully and malignly watching the rim of man’s worldand guarding with horror the reaches of a cold northern world that is not man’s. Fromtheir hideous laps rose evil shantaks of elephantine bulk, but these all fled with insane tittersas the vanguard of night-gaunts was sighted in the misty sky. Northward above those gargoylemountains the army flew, and over leagues of dim desert where never a landmark rose. Less andless luminous grew the clouds, till at length Carter could see only blackness around him; butnever did the winged steeds falter, bred as they were in earth’s blackest crypts, andseeing not with any eyes, but with the whole dank surface of their slippery forms. On and onthey flew, past winds of dubious scent and sounds of dubious import; ever in thickest darkness,and covering such prodigious spaces that Carter wondered whether or not they could still bewithin earth’s dreamland.
Then suddenly the clouds thinned and the stars shone spectrally above. Allbelow was still black, but those pallid beacons in the sky seemed alive with a meaning and directivenessthey had never possessed elsewhere. It was not that the figures of the constellations were different,but that the same familiar shapes now revealed a significance they had formerly failed to makeplain. Everything focussed toward the north; every curve and asterism of the glittering skybecame part of a vast design whose function was to hurry first the eye and then the whole observeronward to some secret and terrible goal of convergence beyond the frozen waste that stretched endlesslyahead. Carter looked toward the east where the great ridge of barrier peaks had towered alongall the length of Inganok, and saw against the stars a jagged silhouette which told of its continuedpresence. It was more broken now, with yawning clefts and fantastically erratic pinnacles; andCarter studied closely the suggestive turns and inclinations of that grotesque outline, whichseemed to share with the stars some subtle northward urge.
They were flying past at a tremendous speed, so that the watcher had to strainhard to catch details; when all at once he beheld just above the line of the topmost peaks adark and moving object against the stars, whose course exactly paralleled that of his own bizarreparty. The ghouls had likewise glimpsed it, for he heard their low glibbering all about him,and for a moment he fancied the object was a gigantic shantak, of a size vastly greater thanthat of the average specimen. Soon, however, he saw that this theory would not hold; for theshape of the thing above the mountains was not that of any hippocephalic bird. Its outline againstthe stars, necessarily vague as it was, resembled rather some huge mitred head or pair of headsinfinitely magnified; and its rapid bobbing flight through the sky seemed most peculiarly awingless one. Carter could not tell which side of the mountains it was on, but soon perceivedthat it had parts below the parts he had first seen, since it blotted out all the stars in placeswhere the ridge was deeply cleft.
Then came a wide gap in the range, where the hideous reaches of transmontaneLeng were joined to the cold waste on this side by a low pass through which the stars shonewanly. Carter watched this gap with intense care, knowing that he might see outlined againstthe sky beyond it the lower parts of the vast thing that flew undulantly above the pinnacles.The object had now floated ahead a trifle, and every eye of the party was fixed on the riftwhere it would presently appear in full-length silhouette. Gradually the huge thing above thepeaks neared the gap, slightly slackening its speed as if conscious of having outdistanced theghoulish army. For another minute suspense was keen, and then the brief instant of full silhouetteand revelation came; bringing to the lips of the ghouls an awed and half-choked meep of cosmicfear, and to the soul of the traveller a chill that has never wholly left it. For the mammothbobbing shape that overtopped the ridge was only a head—a mitred double head—andbelow it in terrible vastness loped the frightful swollen body that bore it; the mountain-highmonstrosity that walked in stealth and silence; the hyaena-like distortion of a giant anthropoidshape that trotted blackly against the sky, its repulsive pair of cone-capped heads reachinghalf way to the zenith.
Carter did not lose consciousness or even scream aloud, for he was an old dreamer;but he looked behind him in horror and shuddered when he saw that there were other monstrousheads silhouetted above the level of the peaks, bobbing along stealthily after the first one.And straight in the rear were three of the mighty mountain shapes seen full against the southernstars, tiptoeing wolf-like and lumberingly, their tall mitres nodding thousands of feet in theair. The carven mountains, then, had not stayed squatting in that rigid semicircle north ofInganok with right hands uplifted. They had duties to perform, and were not remiss. But it washorrible that they never spoke, and never even made a sound in walking.
Meanwhile the ghoul that was Pickman had glibbered an order to the night-gaunts,and the whole army soared higher into the air. Up toward the stars the grotesque column shot,till nothing stood out any longer against the sky; neither the grey granite ridge that was stillnor the carven and mitred mountains that walked. All was blackness beneath as the flutteringlegions surged northward amidst rushing winds and invisible laughter in the aether, and nevera shantak or less mentionable entity rose from the haunted wastes to pursue them. The fartherthey went, the faster they flew, till soon their dizzying speed seemed to pass that of a rifleball and approach that of a planet in its orbit. Carter wondered how with such speed the earthcould still stretch beneath them, but knew that in the land of dream dimensions have strangeproperties. That they were in a realm of eternal night he felt certain, and he fancied thatthe constellations overhead had subtly emphasised their northward focus; gathering themselvesup as it were to cast the flying army into the void of the boreal pole, as the folds of a bagare gathered up to cast out the last bits of substance therein.
Then he noticed with terror that the wings of the night-gaunts were not flappingany more. The horned and faceless steeds had folded their membraneous appendages, and were restingquite passive in the chaos of wind that whirled and chuckled as it bore them on. A force notof earth had seized on the army, and ghouls and night-gaunts alike were powerless before a currentwhich pulled madly and relentlessly into the north whence no mortal had ever returned. At lengtha lone pallid light was seen on the skyline ahead, thereafter rising steadily as they approached,and having beneath it a black mass that blotted out the stars. Carter saw that it must be somebeacon on a mountain, for only a mountain could rise so vast as seen from so prodigious a heightin the air.
Higher and higher rose the light and the blackness beneath it, till half thenorthern sky was obscured by the rugged conical mass. Lofty as the army was, that pale and sinisterbeacon rose above it, towering monstrous over all peaks and concernments of earth, and tastingthe atomless aether where the cryptical moon and the mad planets reel. No mountain known ofman was that which loomed before them. The high clouds far below were but a fringe for its foothills.The gasping dizziness of topmost air was but a girdle for its loins. Scornful and spectral climbedthat bridge betwixt earth and heaven, black in eternal night, and crowned with a pshent of unknownstars whose awful and significant outline grew every moment clearer. Ghouls meeped in wonderas they saw it, and Carter shivered in fear lest all the hurtling army be dashed to pieces onthe unyielding onyx of that Cyclopean cliff.
Higher and higher rose the light, till it mingled with the loftiest orbs ofthe zenith and winked down at the flyers with lurid mockery. All the north beneath it was blacknessnow; dread, stony blackness from infinite depths to infinite heights, with only that pale winkingbeacon perched unreachably at the top of all vision. Carter studied the light more closely,and saw at last what lines its inky background made against the stars. There were towers onthat titan mountain-top; horrible domed towers in noxious and incalculable tiers and clustersbeyond any dreamable workmanship of man; battlements and terraces of wonder and menace, alllimned tiny and black and distant against the starry pshent that glowed malevolently at theuppermost rim of sight. Capping that most measureless of mountains was a castle beyond all mortalthought, and in it glowed the daemon-light. Then Randolph Carter knew that his quest was done,and that he saw above him the goal of all forbidden steps and audacious visions; the fabulous,the incredible home of the Great Ones atop unknown Kadath.
Even as he realised this thing, Carter noticed a change in the course of thehelplessly wind-sucked party. They were rising abruptly now, and it was plain that the focusof their flight was the onyx castle where the pale light shone. So close was the great blackmountain that its sides sped by them dizzily as they shot upward, and in the darkness they coulddiscern nothing upon it. Vaster and vaster loomed the tenebrous towers of the nighted castleabove, and Carter could see that it was well-nigh blasphemous in its immensity. Well might itsstones have been quarried by nameless workmen in that horrible gulf rent out of the rock inthe hill pass north of Inganok, for such was its size that a man on its threshold stood evenas an ant on the steps of earth’s loftiest fortress. The pshent of unknown stars abovethe myriad domed turrets glowed with a sallow, sickly flare, so that a kind of twilight hungabout the murky walls of slippery onyx. The pallid beacon was now seen to be a single shiningwindow high up in one of the loftiest towers, and as the helpless army neared the top of themountain Carter thought he detected unpleasant shadows flitting across the feebly luminous expanse.It was a strangely arched window, of a design wholly alien to earth.
The solid rock now gave place to the giant foundations of the monstrous castle,and it seemed that the speed of the party was somewhat abated. Vast walls shot up, and therewas a glimpse of a great gate through which the voyagers were swept. All was night in the titancourtyard, and then came the deeper blackness of inmost things as a huge arched portal engulfedthe column. Vortices of cold wind surged dankly through sightless labyrinths of onyx, and Cartercould never tell what Cyclopean stairs and corridors lay silent along the route of his endlessaërial twisting. Always upward led the terrible plunge in darkness, and never a sound,touch, or glimpse broke the dense pall of mystery. Large as the army of ghouls and night-gauntswas, it was lost in the prodigious voids of that more than earthly castle. And when at lastthere suddenly dawned around him the lurid light of that single tower room whose lofty windowhad served as a beacon, it took Carter long to discern the far walls and high, distant ceiling,and to realise that he was indeed not again in the boundless air outside.
Randolph Carter had hoped to come into the throne-room of the Great Ones withpoise and dignity, flanked and followed by impressive lines of ghouls in ceremonial order, andoffering his prayer as a free and potent master among dreamers. He had known that the GreatOnes themselves are not beyond a mortal’s power to cope with, and had trusted to luckthat the Other Gods and their crawling chaos Nyarlathotep would not happen to come to theiraid at the crucial moment, as they had so often done before when men sought out earth’sgods in their home or on their mountains. And with his hideous escort he had half hoped to defyeven the Other Gods if need were, knowing as he did that ghouls have no masters, and that night-gauntsown not Nyarlathotep but only archaick Nodens for their lord. But now he saw that supernal Kadathin its cold waste is indeed girt with dark wonders and nameless sentinels, and that the OtherGods are of a surety vigilant in guarding the mild, feeble gods of earth. Void as they are oflordship over ghouls and night-gaunts, the mindless, shapeless blasphemies of outer space canyet control them when they must; so that it was not in state as a free and potent master ofdreamers that Randolph Carter came into the Great Ones’ throne-room with his ghouls. Sweptand herded by nightmare tempests from the stars, and dogged by unseen horrors of the northernwaste, all that army floated captive and helpless in the lurid light, dropping numbly to theonyx floor when by some voiceless order the winds of fright dissolved.
Before no golden dais had Randolph Carter come, nor was there any august circleof crowned and haloed beings with narrow eyes, long-lobed ears, thin nose, and pointed chinwhose kinship to the carven face on Ngranek might stamp them as those to whom a dreamer mightpray. Save for that one tower room the onyx castle atop Kadath was dark, and the masters werenot there. Carter had come to unknown Kadath in the cold waste, but he had not found the gods.Yet still the lurid light glowed in that one tower room whose size was so little less than thatof all outdoors, and whose distant walls and roof were so nearly lost to sight in thin, curlingmists. Earth’s gods were not there, it was true, but of subtler and less visible presencesthere could be no lack. Where the mild gods are absent, the Other Gods are not unrepresented;and certainly, the onyx castle of castles was far from tenantless. In what outrageous form orforms terror would next reveal itself, Carter could by no means imagine. He felt that his visithad been expected, and wondered how close a watch had all along been kept upon him by the crawlingchaos Nyarlathotep. It is Nyarlathotep, horror of infinite shapes and dread soul and messengerof the Other Gods, that the fungous moon-beasts serve; and Carter thought of the black galleythat had vanished when the tide of battle turned against the toad-like abnormalities on thejagged rock in the sea.
Reflecting upon these things, he was staggering to his feet in the midst ofhis nightmare company when there rang without warning through that pale-litten and limitlesschamber the hideous blast of a daemon trumpet. Three times pealed that frightful brazen scream,and when the echoes of the third blast had died chucklingly away Randolph Carter saw that hewas alone. Whither, why, and how the ghouls and night-gaunts had been snatched from sight wasnot for him to divine. He knew only that he was suddenly alone, and that whatever unseen powerslurked mockingly around him were no powers of earth’s friendly dreamland. Presently fromthe chamber’s uttermost reaches a new sound came. This, too, was a rhythmic trumpeting;but of a kind far removed from the three raucous blasts which had dissolved his grisly cohorts.In this low fanfare echoed all the wonder and melody of ethereal dream; exotic vistas of unimaginedloveliness floating from each strange chord and subtly alien cadence. Odours of incense cameto match the golden notes; and overhead a great light dawned, its colours changing in cyclesunknown to earth’s spectrum, and following the song of the trumpet in weird symphonicharmonies. Torches flared in the distance, and the beat of drums throbbed nearer amidst wavesof tense expectancy.
Out of the thinning mists and the cloud of strange incense filed twin columnsof giant black slaves with loin-cloths of iridescent silk. Upon their heads were strapped vasthelmet-like torches of glittering metal, from which the fragrance of obscure balsams spreadin fumous spirals. In their right hands were crystal wands whose tips were carven into leeringchimaeras, while their left hands grasped long, thin silver trumpets which they blew in turn.Armlets and anklets of gold they had, and between each pair of anklets stretched a golden chainthat held its wearer to a sober gait. That they were true black men of earth’s dreamlandwas at once apparent, but it seemed less likely that their rites and costumes were wholly thingsof our earth. Ten feet from Carter the columns stopped, and as they did so each trumpet flewabruptly to its bearer’s thick lips. Wild and ecstatic was the blast that followed, andwilder still the cry that chorused just after from dark throats somehow made shrill by strangeartifice.
Then down the wide lane betwixt the two columns a lone figure strode; a tall,slim figure with the young face of an antique Pharaoh, gay with prismatic robes and crownedwith a golden pshent that glowed with inherent light. Close up to Carter strode that regal figure;whose proud carriage and swart features had in them the fascination of a dark god or fallenarchangel, and around whose eyes there lurked the languid sparkle of capricious humour. It spoke,and in its mellow tones there rippled the mild music of Lethean streams.
“Randolph Carter,” said the voice, “you have come to seethe Great Ones whom it is unlawful for men to see. Watchers have spoken of this thing, and theOther Gods have grunted as they rolled and tumbled mindlessly to the sound of thin flutes inthe black ultimate void where broods the daemon-sultan whose name no lips dare speak aloud.
“When Barzai the Wise climbed Hatheg-Kla to see the Great Ones danceand howl above the clouds in the moonlight he never returned. The Other Gods were there, andthey did what was expected. Zenig of Aphorat sought to reach unknown Kadath in the cold waste,and his skull is now set in a ring on the little finger of one whom I need not name.
“But you, Randolph Carter, have braved all things of earth’s dreamland,and burn still with the flame of quest. You came not as one curious, but as one seeking hisdue, nor have you failed ever in reverence toward the mild gods of earth. Yet have these godskept you from the marvellous sunset city of your dreams, and wholly through their own smallcovetousness; for verily, they craved the weird loveliness of that which your fancy had fashioned,and vowed that henceforward no other spot should be their abode.
“They are gone from their castle on unknown Kadath to dwell in your marvellouscity. All through its palaces of veined marble they revel by day, and when the sun sets theygo out in the perfumed gardens and watch the golden glory on temples and colonnades, archedbridges and silver-basined fountains, and wide streets with blossom-laden urns and ivory statuesin gleaming rows. And when night comes they climb tall terraces in the dew, and sit on carvedbenches of porphyry scanning the stars, or lean over pale balustrades to gaze at the town’ssteep northward slopes, where one by one the little windows in old peaked gables shine softlyout with the calm yellow light of homely candles.
“The gods love your marvellous city, and walk no more in the ways ofthe gods. They have forgotten the high places of earth, and the mountains that knew their youth.The earth has no longer any gods that are gods, and only the Other Ones from outer space holdsway on unremembered Kadath. Far away in a valley of your own childhood, Randolph Carter, playthe heedless Great Ones. You have dreamed too well, O wise arch-dreamer, for you have drawndream’s gods away from the world of all men’s visions to that which is wholly yours;having builded out of your boyhood’s small fancies a city more lovely than all the phantomsthat have gone before.
“It is not well that earth’s gods leave their thrones for the spiderto spin on, and their realm for the Others to sway in the dark manner of Others. Fain wouldthe powers from outside bring chaos and horror to you, Randolph Carter, who are the cause oftheir upsetting, but that they know it is by you alone that the gods may be sent back to theirworld. In that half-waking dreamland which is yours, no power of uttermost night may pursue;and only you can send the selfish Great Ones gently out of your marvellous sunset city, backthrough the northern twilight to their wonted place atop unknown Kadath in the cold waste.
“So, Randolph Carter, in the name of the Other Gods I spare you and chargeyou to serve my will. I charge you to seek that sunset city which is yours, and to send thencethe drowsy truant gods for whom the dream-world waits. Not hard to find is that roseal feverof the gods, that fanfare of supernal trumpets and clash of immortal cymbals, that mystery whoseplace and meaning have haunted you through the halls of waking and the gulfs of dreaming, andtormented you with hints of vanished memory and the pain of lost things awesome and momentous.Not hard to find is that symbol and relic of your days of wonder, for truly, it is but the stableand eternal gem wherein all that wonder sparkles crystallised to light your evening path. Behold!It is not over unknown seas but back over well-known years that your quest must go; back tothe bright strange things of infancy and the quick sun-drenched glimpses of magic that old scenesbrought to wide young eyes.
“For know you, that your gold and marble city of wonder is only the sumof what you have seen and loved in youth. It is the glory of Boston’s hillside roofs andwestern windows aflame with sunset; of the flower-fragrant Common and the great dome on thehill and the tangle of gables and chimneys in the violet valley where the many-bridged Charlesflows drowsily. These things you saw, Randolph Carter, when your nurse first wheeled you outin the springtime, and they will be the last things you will ever see with eyes of memory andof love. And there is antique Salem with its brooding years, and spectral Marblehead scalingits rocky precipices into past centuries, and the glory of Salem’s towers and spires seenafar from Marblehead’s pastures across the harbour against the setting sun.
“There is Providence, quaint and lordly on its seven hills over the blueharbour, with terraces of green leading up to steeples and citadels of living antiquity, andNewport climbing wraith-like from its dreaming breakwater. Arkham is there, with its moss-growngambrel roofs and the rocky rolling meadows behind it; and antediluvian Kingsport hoary withstacked chimneys and deserted quays and overhanging gables, and the marvel of high cliffs andthe milky-misted ocean with tolling buoys beyond.
“Cool vales in Concord, cobbled lanes in Portsmouth, twilight bends ofrustic New-Hampshire roads where giant elms half hide white farmhouse walls and creaking well-sweeps.Gloucester’s salt wharves and Truro’s windy willows. Vistas of distant steepledtowns and hills beyond hills along the North Shore, hushed stony slopes and low ivied cottagesin the lee of huge boulders in Rhode-Island’s back country. Scent of the sea and fragranceof the fields; spell of the dark woods and joy of the orchards and gardens at dawn. These, RandolphCarter, are your city; for they are yourself. New-England bore you, and into your soul she poureda liquid loveliness which cannot die. This loveliness, moulded, crystallised, and polished byyears of memory and dreaming, is your terraced wonder of elusive sunsets; and to find that marbleparapet with curious urns and carven rail, and descend at last those endless balustraded stepsto the city of broad squares and prismatic fountains, you need only to turn back to the thoughtsand visions of your wistful boyhood.
“Look! through that window shine the stars of eternal night. Even nowthey are shining above the scenes you have known and cherished, drinking of their charm thatthey may shine more lovely over the gardens of dream. There is Antares—he is winking atthis moment over the roofs of Tremont Street, and you could see him from your window on BeaconHill. Out beyond those stars yawn the gulfs from whence my mindless masters have sent me. Someday you too may traverse them, but if you are wise you will beware such folly; for of thosemortals who have been and returned, only one preserves a mind unshattered by the pounding, clawinghorrors of the void. Terrors and blasphemies gnaw at one another for space, and there is moreevil in the lesser ones than in the greater; even as you know from the deeds of those who soughtto deliver you into my hands, whilst I myself harboured no wish to shatter you, and would indeedhave helped you hither long ago had I not been elsewhere busy, and certain that you would yourselffind the way. Shun, then, the outer hells, and stick to the calm, lovely things of your youth.Seek out your marvellous city and drive thence the recreant Great Ones, sending them back gentlyto those scenes which are of their own youth, and which wait uneasy for their return.
“Easier even than the way of dim memory is the way I will prepare foryou. See! There comes hither a monstrous shantak, led by a slave who for your peace of mindhad best keep invisible. Mount and be ready—there! Yogash the black will help you on thescaly horror. Steer for that brightest star just south of the zenith—it is Vega, and intwo hours will be just above the terrace of your sunset city. Steer for it only till you heara far-off singing in the high aether. Higher than that lurks madness, so rein your shantak whenthe first note lures. Look then back to earth, and you will see shining the deathless altar-flameof Ired-Naa from the sacred roof of a temple. That temple is in your desiderate sunset city,so steer for it before you heed the singing and are lost.
“When you draw nigh the city steer for the same high parapet whence ofold you scanned the outspread glory, prodding the shantak till he cry aloud. That cry the GreatOnes will hear and know as they sit on their perfumed terraces, and there will come upon themsuch a homesickness that all of your city’s wonders will not console them for the absenceof Kadath’s grim castle and the pshent of eternal stars that crowns it.
“Then must you land amongst them with the shantak, and let them see andtouch that noisome and hippocephalic bird; meanwhile discoursing to them of unknown Kadath,which you will so lately have left, and telling them how its boundless halls are lonely andunlighted, where of old they used to leap and revel in supernal radiance. And the shantak willtalk to them in the manner of shantaks, but it will have no powers of persuasion beyond therecalling of elder days.
“Over and over must you speak to the wandering Great Ones of their homeand youth, till at last they will weep and ask to be shewn the returning path they have forgotten.Thereat can you loose the waiting shantak, sending him skyward with the homing cry of his kind;hearing which the Great Ones will prance and jump with antique mirth, and forthwith stride afterthe loathly bird in the fashion of gods, through the deep gulfs of heaven to Kadath’sfamiliar towers and domes.
“Then will the marvellous sunset city be yours to cherish and inhabitforever, and once more will earth’s gods rule the dreams of men from their accustomedseat. Go now—the casement is open and the stars await outside. Already your shantak wheezesand titters with impatience. Steer for Vega through the night, but turn when the singing sounds.Forget not this warning, lest horrors unthinkable suck you into the gulf of shrieking and ululantmadness. Remember the Other Gods; they are great and mindless and terrible, and lurk in theouter voids. They are good gods to shun.
“Hei! Aa-shanta ’nygh! You are off! Send back earth’sgods to their haunts on unknown Kadath, and pray to all space that you may never meet me inmy thousand other forms. Farewell, Randolph Carter, and beware; for I am Nyarlathotep, theCrawling Chaos!”
And Randolph Carter, gasping and dizzy on his hideous shantak, shot screaminglyinto space toward the cold blue glare of boreal Vega; looking but once behind him at the clusteredand chaotic turrets of the onyx nightmare wherein still glowed the lone lurid light of thatwindow above the air and the clouds of earth’s dreamland. Great polypous horrors sliddarkly past, and unseen bat-wings beat multitudinous around him, but still he clung to the unwholesomemane of that loathly and hippocephalic scaled bird. The stars danced mockingly, almost shiftingnow and then to form pale signs of doom that one might wonder one had not seen and feared before;and ever the winds of aether howled of vague blackness and loneliness beyond the cosmos.
Then through the glittering vault ahead there fell a hush of portent, and allthe winds and horrors slunk away as night things slink away before the dawn. Trembling in wavesthat golden wisps of nebula made weirdly visible, there rose a timid hint of far-off melody,droning in faint chords that our own universe of stars knows not. And as that music grew, theshantak raised its ears and plunged ahead, and Carter likewise bent to catch each lovely strain.It was a song, but not the song of any voice. Night and the spheres sang it, and it was oldwhen space and Nyarlathotep and the Other Gods were born.
Faster flew the shantak, and lower bent the rider, drunk with the marvels ofstrange gulfs, and whirling in the crystal coils of outer magic. Then came too late the warningof the evil one, the sardonic caution of the daemon legate who had bidden the seeker bewarethe madness of that song. Only to taunt had Nyarlathotep marked out the way to safety and themarvellous sunset city; only to mock had that black messenger revealed the secret of those truantgods whose steps he could so easily lead back at will. For madness and the void’s wildvengeance are Nyarlathotep’s only gifts to the presumptuous; and frantick though the riderstrove to turn his disgusting steed, that leering, tittering shantak coursed on impetuous andrelentless, flapping its great slippery wings in malignant joy, and headed for those unhallowedpits whither no dreams reach; that last amorphous blight of nethermost confusion where bubblesand blasphemes at infinity’s centre the mindless daemon-sultan Azathoth, whose name nolips dare speak aloud.
Unswerving and obedient to the foul legate’s orders, that hellish birdplunged onward through shoals of shapeless lurkers and caperers in darkness, and vacuous herdsof drifting entities that pawed and groped and groped and pawed; the nameless larvae of theOther Gods, that are like them blind and without mind, and possessed of singular hungers andthirsts.
Onward unswerving and relentless, and tittering hilariously to watch the chucklingand hysterics into which the siren song of night and the spheres had turned, that eldritch scalymonster bore its helpless rider; hurtling and shooting, cleaving the uttermost rim and spanningthe outermost abysses; leaving behind the stars and the realms of matter, and darting meteor-likethrough stark formlessness toward those inconceivable, unlighted chambers beyond Time whereinblack Azathoth gnaws shapeless and ravenous amidst the muffled, maddening beat of vile drumsand the thin, monotonous whine of accursed flutes.
Onward—onward—through the screaming, cackling, and blackly populousgulfs—and then from some dim blessed distance there came an image and a thought to RandolphCarter the doomed. Too well had Nyarlathotep planned his mocking and his tantalising, for hehad brought up that which no gusts of icy terror could quite efface. Home—New England—BeaconHill—the waking world.
“For know you, that your gold and marble city of wonder is only the sumof what you have seen and loved in youth&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the glory of Boston’s hillside roofs andwestern windows aflame with sunset; of the flower-fragrant Common and the great dome on thehill and the tangle of gables and chimneys in the violet valley where the many-bridged Charlesflows drowsily&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. this loveliness, moulded, crystallised, and polished by years of memoryand dreaming, is your terraced wonder of elusive sunsets; and to find that marble parapet withcurious urns and carven rail, and descend at last those endless balustraded steps to the cityof broad squares and prismatic fountains, you need only to turn back to the thoughts and visionsof your wistful boyhood.”
Onward—onward—dizzily onward to ultimate doom through the blacknesswhere sightless feelers pawed and slimy snouts jostled and nameless things tittered and titteredand tittered. But the image and the thought had come, and Randolph Carter knew clearly thathe was dreaming and only dreaming, and that somewhere in the background the world of wakingand the city of his infancy still lay. Words came again—“You need only turn backto the thoughts and visions of your wistful boyhood.” Turn—turn—blacknesson every side, but Randolph Carter could turn.
Thick though the rushing nightmare that clutched his senses, Randolph Cartercould turn and move. He could move, and if he chose he could leap off the evil shantak thatbore him hurtlingly doomward at the orders of Nyarlathotep. He could leap off and dare thosedepths of night that yawned interminably down, those depths of fear whose terrors yet couldnot exceed the nameless doom that lurked waiting at chaos’ core. He could turn and moveand leap—he could—he would—he would—
Off that vast hippocephalic abomination leaped the doomed and desperate dreamer,and down through endless voids of sentient blackness he fell. Aeons reeled, universes died andwere born again, stars became nebulae and nebulae became stars, and still Randolph Carter fellthrough those endless voids of sentient blackness.
Then in the slow creeping course of eternity the utmost cycle of the cosmoschurned itself into another futile completion, and all things became again as they were unreckonedkalpas before. Matter and light were born anew as space once had known them; and comets, suns,and worlds sprang flaming into life, though nothing survived to tell that they had been andgone, been and gone, always and always, back to no first beginning.
And there was a firmament again, and a wind, and a glare of purple light inthe eyes of the falling dreamer. There were gods and presences and wills; beauty and evil, andthe shrieking of noxious night robbed of its prey. For through the unknown ultimate cycle hadlived a thought and a vision of a dreamer’s boyhood, and now there were re-made a wakingworld and an old cherished city to body and to justify these things. Out of the void S’ngacthe violet gas had pointed the way, and archaic Nodens was bellowing his guidance from unhinteddeeps.
Stars swelled to dawns, and dawns burst into fountains of gold, carmine, andpurple, and still the dreamer fell. Cries rent the aether as ribbons of light beat back thefiends from outside. And hoary Nodens raised a howl of triumph when Nyarlathotep, close on hisquarry, stopped baffled by a glare that seared his formless hunting-horrors to grey dust. RandolphCarter had indeed descended at last the wide marmoreal flights to his marvellous city, for hewas come again to the fair New England world that had wrought him.
So to the organ chords of morning’s myriad whistles, and dawn’sblaze thrown dazzling through purple panes by the great gold dome of the State House on thehill, Randolph Carter leaped shoutingly awake within his Boston room. Birds sang in hidden gardensand the perfume of trellised vines came wistful from arbours his grandfather had reared. Beautyand light glowed from classic mantel and carven cornice and walls grotesquely figured, whilea sleek black cat rose yawning from hearthside sleep that his master’s start and shriekhad disturbed. And vast infinities away, past the Gate of Deeper Slumber and the enchanted woodand the garden lands and the Cerenerian Sea and the twilight reaches of Inganok, the crawlingchaos Nyarlathotep strode brooding into the onyx castle atop unknown Kadath in the cold waste,and taunted insolently the mild gods of earth whom he had snatched abruptly from their scentedrevels in the marvellous sunset city.
