My memories are very confused. There is even much doubt as to where they begin; for at timesI feel appalling vistas of years stretching behind me, while at other times it seems as if thepresent moment were an isolated point in a grey, formless infinity. I am not even certain howI am communicating this message. While I know I am speaking, I have a vague impression thatsome strange and perhaps terrible mediation will be needed to bear what I say to the pointswhere I wish to be heard. My identity, too, is bewilderingly cloudy. I seem to have suffereda great shock—perhaps from some utterly monstrous outgrowth of my cycles of unique, incredibleexperience.
These cycles of experience, of course, all stem from that worm-riddled book.I remember when I found it—in a dimly lighted place near the black, oily river where themists always swirl. That place was very old, and the ceiling-high shelves full of rotting volumesreached back endlessly through windowless inner rooms and alcoves. There were, besides, greatformless heaps of books on the floor and in crude bins; and it was in one of these heaps thatI found the thing. I never learned its title, for the early pages were missing; but it fellopen toward the end and gave me a glimpse of something which sent my senses reeling.
There was a formula—a sort of list of things to say and do—whichI recognised as something black and forbidden; something which I had read of before in furtiveparagraphs of mixed abhorrence and fascination penned by those strange ancient delvers intothe universe’s guarded secrets whose decaying texts I loved to absorb. It was a key—aguide—to certain gateways and transitions of which mystics have dreamed and whisperedsince the race was young, and which lead to freedoms and discoveries beyond the three dimensionsand realms of life and matter that we know. Not for centuries had any man recalled its vitalsubstance or known where to find it, but this book was very old indeed. No printing-press, butthe hand of some half-crazed monk, had traced these ominous Latin phrases in uncials of awesomeantiquity.
I remember how the old man leered and tittered, and made a curious sign withhis hand when I bore it away. He had refused to take pay for it, and only long afterward didI guess why. As I hurried home through those narrow, winding, mist-choked waterfront streetsI had a frightful impression of being stealthily followed by softly padding feet. The centuried,tottering houses on both sides seemed alive with a fresh and morbid malignity—as if somehitherto closed channel of evil understanding had abruptly been opened. I felt that those wallsand overhanging gables of mildewed brick and fungous plaster and timber—with fishy, eye-like,diamond-paned windows that leered—could hardly desist from advancing and crushing me&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.yet I had read only the least fragment of that blasphemous rune before closing the book andbringing it away.
I remember how I read the book at last—white-faced, and locked in theattic room that I had long devoted to strange searchings. The great house was very still, forI had not gone up till after midnight. I think I had a family then—though the detailsare very uncertain—and I know there were many servants. Just what the year was, I cannotsay; for since then I have known many ages and dimensions, and have had all my notions of timedissolved and refashioned. It was by the light of candles that I read—I recall the relentlessdripping of the wax—and there were chimes that came every now and then from distant belfries.I seemed to keep track of those chimes with a peculiar intentness, as if I feared to hear somevery remote, intruding note among them.
Then came the first scratching and fumbling at the dormer window that lookedout high above the other roofs of the city. It came as I droned aloud the ninth verse of thatprimal lay, and I knew amidst my shudders what it meant. For he who passes the gateways alwayswins a shadow, and never again can he be alone. I had evoked—and the book was indeed allI had suspected. That night I passed the gateway to a vortex of twisted time and vision, andwhen morning found me in the attic room I saw in the walls and shelves and fittings that whichI had never seen before.
Nor could I ever after see the world as I had known it. Mixed with the presentscene was always a little of the past and a little of the future, and every once-familiar objectloomed alien in the new perspective brought by my widened sight. From then on I walked in afantastic dream of unknown and half-known shapes; and with each new gateway crossed, the lessplainly could I recognise the things of the narrow sphere to which I had so long been bound.What I saw about me none else saw; and I grew doubly silent and aloof lest I be thought mad.Dogs had a fear of me, for they felt the outside shadow which never left my side. But stillI read more—in hidden, forgotten books and scrolls to which my new vision led me—andpushed through fresh gateways of space and being and life-patterns toward the core of the unknowncosmos.
I remember the night I made the five concentric circles of fire on the floor,and stood in the innermost one chanting that monstrous litany the messenger from Tartary hadbrought. The walls melted away, and I was swept by a black wind through gulfs of fathomlessgrey with the needle-like pinnacles of unknown mountains miles below me. After a while therewas utter blackness, and then the light of myriad stars forming strange, alien constellations.Finally I saw a green-litten plain far below me, and discerned on it the twisted towers of acity built in no fashion I had ever known or read of or dreamed of. As I floated closer to thatcity I saw a great square building of stone in an open space, and felt a hideous fear clutchingat me. I screamed and struggled, and after a blankness was again in my attic room, sprawledflat over the five phosphorescent circles on the floor. In that night’s wandering therewas no more of strangeness than in many a former night’s wandering; but there was moreof terror because I knew I was closer to those outside gulfs and worlds than I had ever beenbefore. Thereafter I was more cautious with my incantations, for I had no wish to be cut offfrom my body and from the earth in unknown abysses whence I could never return.
