Of the pleasures and pains of opium much has been written. The ecstasies and horrors of De Quinceyand the paradis artificiels of Baudelaire are preserved and interpreted with an art whichmakes them immortal, and the world knows well the beauty, the terror, and the mystery of thoseobscure realms into which the inspired dreamer is transported. But much as has been told, no manhas yet dared intimate the nature of the phantasms thus unfolded to the mind, or hint at thedirection of the unheard-of roads along whose ornate and exotic course the partaker of thedrug is so irresistibly borne. De Quincey was drawn back into Asia, that teeming land of nebulousshadows whose hideous antiquity is so impressive that “the vast age of the race and nameoverpowers the sense of youth in the individual”, but farther than that he dared not go. Thosewho have gone farther seldom returned; and even when they have, they have been either silentor quite mad. I took opium but once—in the year of the plague, when doctors sought to deadenthe agonies they could not cure. There was an overdose—my physician was worn out with horrorand exertion—and I travelled very far indeed. In the end I returned and lived, but my nightsare filled with strange memories, nor have I ever permitted a doctor to give me opium again.
The pain and pounding in my head had been quite unendurable when the drug wasadministered. Of the future I had no heed; to escape, whether by cure, unconsciousness, or death,was all that concerned me. I was partly delirious, so that it is hard to place the exact moment oftransition, but I think the effect must have begun shortly before the pounding ceased to bepainful. As I have said, there was an overdose; so my reactions were probably far from normal. Thesensation of falling, curiously dissociated from the idea of gravity or direction, was paramount;though there was a subsidiary impression of unseen throngs in incalculable profusion, throngs ofinfinitely diverse nature, but all more or less related to me. Sometimes it seemed less as thoughI were falling, than as though the universe or the ages were falling past me. Suddenly my painceased, and I began to associate the pounding with an external rather than internal force. Thefalling had ceased also, giving place to a sensation of uneasy, temporary rest; and when I listenedclosely, I fancied the pounding was that of the vast, inscrutable sea as its sinister, colossalbreakers lacerated some desolate shore after a storm of titanic magnitude. Then I opened myeyes.
For a moment my surroundings seemed confused, like a projected image hopelesslyout of focus, but gradually I realised my solitary presence in a strange and beautiful room lightedby many windows. Of the exact nature of the apartment I could form no idea, for my thoughts werestill far from settled; but I noticed vari-coloured rugs and draperies, elaborately fashionedtables, chairs, ottomans, and divans, and delicate vases and ornaments which conveyed a suggestionof the exotic without being actually alien. These things I noticed, yet they were not longuppermost in my mind. Slowly but inexorably crawling upon my consciousness, and rising above everyother impression, came a dizzying fear of the unknown; a fear all the greater because I could notanalyse it, and seeming to concern a stealthily approaching menace—not death, but somenameless, unheard-of thing inexpressibly more ghastly and abhorrent.
Presently I realised that the direct symbol and excitant of my fear was thehideous pounding whose incessant reverberations throbbed maddeningly against my exhausted brain. Itseemed to come from a point outside and below the edifice in which I stood, and to associate itselfwith the most terrifying mental images. I felt that some horrible scene or object lurked beyond thesilk-hung walls, and shrank from glancing through the arched, latticed windows that opened sobewilderingly on every hand. Perceiving shutters attached to these windows, I closed them all,averting my eyes from the exterior as I did so. Then, employing a flint and steel which I found onone of the small tables, I lit the many candles reposing about the walls in Arabesque sconces. Theadded sense of security brought by closed shutters and artificial light calmed my nerves to somedegree, but I could not shut out the monotonous pounding. Now that I was calmer, the sound becameas fascinating as it was fearful, and I felt a contradictory desire to seek out its source despitemy still powerful shrinking. Opening a portiere at the side of the room nearest the pounding, Ibeheld a small and richly draped corridor ending in a carven door and large oriel window. To thiswindow I was irresistibly drawn, though my ill-defined apprehensions seemed almost equally bent onholding me back. As I approached it I could see a chaotic whirl of waters in the distance. Then, asI attained it and glanced out on all sides, the stupendous picture of my surroundings burst upon mewith full and devastating force.
I beheld such a sight as I had never beheld before, and which no living person canhave seen save in the delirium of fever or the inferno of opium. The building stood on a narrowpoint of land—or what was now a narrow point of land—fully 300 feet above whatmust lately have been a seething vortex of mad waters. On either side of the house there fell anewly washed-out precipice of red earth, whilst ahead of me the hideous waves were still rolling infrightfully, eating away the land with ghastly monotony and deliberation. Out a mile or more thererose and fell menacing breakers at least fifty feet in height, and on the far horizon ghoulishblack clouds of grotesque contour were resting and brooding like unwholesome vultures. The waveswere dark and purplish, almost black, and clutched at the yielding red mud of the bank as if withuncouth, greedy hands. I could not but feel that some noxious marine mind had declared a war ofextermination upon all the solid ground, perhaps abetted by the angry sky.
Recovering at length from the stupor into which this unnatural spectacle hadthrown me, I realised that my actual physical danger was acute. Even whilst I gazed the bank hadlost many feet, and it could not be long before the house would fall undermined into the awful pitof lashing waves. Accordingly I hastened to the opposite side of the edifice, and finding a door,emerged at once, locking it after me with a curious key which had hung inside. I now beheld more ofthe strange region about me, and marked a singular division which seemed to exist in the hostileocean and firmament. On each side of the jutting promontory different conditions held sway. At myleft as I faced inland was a gently heaving sea with great green waves rolling peacefully in undera brightly shining sun. Something about that sun’s nature and position made me shudder, but Icould not then tell, and cannot tell now, what it was. At my right also was the sea, but it wasblue, calm, and only gently undulating, while the sky above it was darker and the washed-out bankmore nearly white than reddish.
I now turned my attention to the land, and found occasion for fresh surprise; forthe vegetation resembled nothing I had ever seen or read about. It was apparently tropical or atleast sub-tropical—a conclusion borne out by the intense heat of the air. Sometimes I thoughtI could trace strange analogies with the flora of my native land, fancying that the well-knownplants and shrubs might assume such forms under a radical change of climate; but the gigantic andomnipresent palm trees were plainly foreign. The house I had just left was very small—hardlymore than a cottage—but its material was evidently marble, and its architecture was weird andcomposite, involving a quaint fusion of Western and Eastern forms. At the corners were Corinthiancolumns, but the red tile roof was like that of a Chinese pagoda. From the door inland therestretched a path of singularly white sand, about four feet wide, and lined on either side withstately palms and unidentifiable flowering shrubs and plants. It lay toward the side of thepromontory where the sea was blue and the bank rather whitish. Down this path I felt impelled toflee, as if pursued by some malignant spirit from the pounding ocean. At first it was slightlyuphill, then I reached a gentle crest. Behind me I saw the scene I had left; the entire point withthe cottage and the black water, with the green sea on one side and the blue sea on the other, anda curse unnamed and unnamable lowering over all. I never saw it again, and oftenwonder.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. After this last look I strode ahead and surveyed the inland panoramabefore me.
The path, as I have intimated, ran along the right-hand shore as one went inland.Ahead and to the left I now viewed a magnificent valley comprising thousands of acres, and coveredwith a swaying growth of tropical grass higher than my head. Almost at the limit of vision was acolossal palm tree which seemed to fascinate and beckon me. By this time wonder and escape from theimperilled peninsula had largely dissipated my fear, but as I paused and sank fatigued to the path,idly digging with my hands into the warm, whitish-golden sand, a new and acute sense of dangerseized me. Some terror in the swishing tall grass seemed added to that of the diabolically poundingsea, and I started up crying aloud and disjointedly, “Tiger? Tiger? Is it Tiger? Beast?Beast? Is it a Beast that I am afraid of?” My mind wandered back to an ancient and classicalstory of tigers which I had read; I strove to recall the author, but had difficulty. Then in themidst of my fear I remembered that the tale was by Rudyard Kipling; nor did the grotesqueness ofdeeming him an ancient author occur to me. I wished for the volume containing this story, and hadalmost started back toward the doomed cottage to procure it when my better sense and the lure ofthe palm prevented me.
Whether or not I could have resisted the backward beckoning without thecounter-fascination of the vast palm tree, I do not know. This attraction was now dominant, and Ileft the path and crawled on hands and knees down the valley’s slope despite my fear of thegrass and of the serpents it might contain. I resolved to fight for life and reason as long aspossible against all menaces of sea or land, though I sometimes feared defeat as the maddeningswish of the uncanny grasses joined the still audible and irritating pounding of the distantbreakers. I would frequently pause and put my hands to my ears for relief, but could never quiteshut out the detestable sound. It was, as it seemed to me, only after ages that I finally draggedmyself to the beckoning palm tree and lay quiet beneath its protecting shade.
There now ensued a series of incidents which transported me to the oppositeextremes of ecstasy and horror; incidents which I tremble to recall and dare not seek to interpret.No sooner had I crawled beneath the overhanging foliage of the palm, than there dropped from itsbranches a young child of such beauty as I never beheld before. Though ragged and dusty, this beingbore the features of a faun or demigod, and seemed almost to diffuse a radiance in the dense shadowof the tree. It smiled and extended its hand, but before I could arise and speak I heard in theupper air the exquisite melody of singing; notes high and low blent with a sublime and etherealharmoniousness. The sun had by this time sunk below the horizon, and in the twilight I saw that anaureola of lambent light encircled the child’s head. Then in a tone of silver it addressed me:“It is the end. They have come down through the gloaming from the stars. Now all is over, andbeyond the Arinurian streams we shall dwell blissfully in Teloe.” As the child spoke, I behelda soft radiance through the leaves of the palm tree, and rising greeted a pair whom I knew to bethe chief singers among those I had heard. A god and goddess they must have been, for such beautyis not mortal; and they took my hands, saying, “Come, child, you have heard the voices, andall is well. In Teloe beyond the Milky Way and the Arinurian streams are cities all of amber andchalcedony. And upon their domes of many facets glisten the images of strange and beautiful stars.Under the ivory bridges of Teloe flow rivers of liquid gold bearing pleasure-barges bound forblossomy Cytharion of the Seven Suns. And in Teloe and Cytharion abide only youth, beauty, andpleasure, nor are any sounds heard, save of laughter, song, and the lute. Only the gods dwell inTeloe of the golden rivers, but among them shalt thou dwell.”
As I listened, enchanted, I suddenly became aware of a change in my surroundings.The palm tree, so lately overshadowing my exhausted form, was now some distance to my left andconsiderably below me. I was obviously floating in the atmosphere; companioned not only by thestrange child and the radiant pair, but by a constantly increasing throng of half-luminous,vine-crowned youths and maidens with wind-blown hair and joyful countenance. We slowly ascendedtogether, as if borne on a fragrant breeze which blew not from the earth but from the goldennebulae, and the child whispered in my ear that I must look always upward to the pathways of light,and never backward to the sphere I had just left. The youths and maidens now chaunted mellifluouschoriambics to the accompaniment of lutes, and I felt enveloped in a peace and happiness moreprofound than any I had in life imagined, when the intrusion of a single sound altered my destinyand shattered my soul. Through the ravishing strains of the singers and the lutanists, as if inmocking, daemoniac concord, throbbed from gulfs below the damnable, the detestable pounding of thathideous ocean. And as those black breakers beat their message into my ears I forgot the words ofthe child and looked back, down upon the doomed scene from which I thought I had escaped.
Down through the aether I saw the accursed earth turning, ever turning, with angryand tempestuous seas gnawing at wild desolate shores and dashing foam against the tottering towersof deserted cities. And under a ghastly moon there gleamed sights I can never describe, sights Ican never forget; deserts of corpse-like clay and jungles of ruin and decadence where oncestretched the populous plains and villages of my native land, and maelstroms of frothing oceanwhere once rose the mighty temples of my forefathers. Around the northern pole steamed a morass ofnoisome growths and miasmal vapours, hissing before the onslaught of the ever-mounting waves thatcurled and fretted from the shuddering deep. Then a rending report clave the night, and athwart thedesert of deserts appeared a smoking rift. Still the black ocean foamed and gnawed, eating away thedesert on either side as the rift in the centre widened and widened.
There was now no land left but the desert, and still the fuming ocean ate and ate.All at once I thought even the pounding sea seemed afraid of something, afraid of dark gods of theinner earth that are greater than the evil god of waters, but even if it was it could not turnback; and the desert had suffered too much from those nightmare waves to help them now. So theocean ate the last of the land and poured into the smoking gulf, thereby giving up all it had everconquered. From the new-flooded lands it flowed again, uncovering death and decay; and from itsancient and immemorial bed it trickled loathsomely, uncovering nighted secrets of the years whenTime was young and the gods unborn. Above the waves rose weedy, remembered spires. The moon laidpale lilies of light on dead London, and Paris stood up from its damp grave to be sanctified withstar-dust. Then rose spires and monoliths that were weedy but not remembered; terrible spires andmonoliths of lands that men never knew were lands.
There was not any pounding now, but only the unearthly roaring and hissing ofwaters tumbling into the rift. The smoke of that rift had changed to steam, and almost hid theworld as it grew denser and denser. It seared my face and hands, and when I looked to see how itaffected my companions I found they had all disappeared. Then very suddenly it ended, and I knew nomore till I awaked upon a bed of convalescence. As the cloud of steam from the Plutonic gulffinally concealed the entire surface from my sight, all the firmament shrieked at a sudden agony ofmad reverberations which shook the trembling aether. In one delirious flash and burst it happened;one blinding, deafening holocaust of fire, smoke, and thunder that dissolved the wan moon as itsped outward to the void.
And when the smoke cleared away, and I sought to look upon the earth, I beheldagainst the background of cold, humorous stars only the dying sun and the pale mournful planetssearching for their sister.
