It was the design of Angelo Ricci and Joe Czanek and Manuel Silva to call on the Terrible OldMan. This old man dwells all alone in a very ancient house on Water Street near the sea, andis reputed to be both exceedingly rich and exceedingly feeble; which forms a situation veryattractive to men of the profession of Messrs. Ricci, Czanek, and Silva, for that professionwas nothing less dignified than robbery.
The inhabitants of Kingsport say and think many things about the Terrible OldMan which generally keep him safe from the attention of gentlemen like Mr. Ricci and his colleagues,despite the almost certain fact that he hides a fortune of indefinite magnitude somewhere abouthis musty and venerable abode. He is, in truth, a very strange person, believed to have beena captain of East India clipper ships in his day; so old that no one can remember when he wasyoung, and so taciturn that few know his real name. Among the gnarled trees in the front yardof his aged and neglected place he maintains a strange collection of large stones, oddly groupedand painted so that they resemble the idols in some obscure Eastern temple. This collectionfrightens away most of the small boys who love to taunt the Terrible Old Man about his longwhite hair and beard, or to break the small-paned windows of his dwelling with wicked missiles;but there are other things which frighten the older and more curious folk who sometimes stealup to the house to peer in through the dusty panes. These folk say that on a table in a bareroom on the ground floor are many peculiar bottles, in each a small piece of lead suspendedpendulum-wise from a string. And they say that the Terrible Old Man talks to these bottles,addressing them by such names as Jack, Scar-Face, Long Tom, Spanish Joe, Peters, and Mate Ellis,and that whenever he speaks to a bottle the little lead pendulum within makes certain definitevibrations as if in answer. Those who have watched the tall, lean, Terrible Old Man in thesepeculiar conversations, do not watch him again. But Angelo Ricci and Joe Czanek and Manuel Silvawere not of Kingsport blood; they were of that new and heterogeneous alien stock which liesoutside the charmed circle of New England life and traditions, and they saw in the TerribleOld Man merely a tottering, almost helpless greybeard, who could not walk without the aid ofhis knotted cane, and whose thin, weak hands shook pitifully. They were really quite sorry intheir way for the lonely, unpopular old fellow, whom everybody shunned, and at whom all thedogs barked singularly. But business is business, and to a robber whose soul is in his profession,there is a lure and a challenge about a very old and very feeble man who has no accountat the bank, and who pays for his few necessities at the village store with Spanish gold andsilver minted two centuries ago.
Messrs. Ricci, Czanek, and Silva selected the night of April 11th for theircall. Mr. Ricci and Mr. Silva were to interview the poor old gentleman, whilst Mr. Czanek waitedfor them and their presumable metallic burden with a covered motor-car in Ship Street, by thegate in the tall rear wall of their host’s grounds. Desire to avoid needless explanationsin case of unexpected police intrusions prompted these plans for a quiet and unostentatiousdeparture.
As prearranged, the three adventurers started out separately in order to preventany evil-minded suspicions afterward. Messrs. Ricci and Silva met in Water Street by the oldman’s front gate, and although they did not like the way the moon shone down upon thepainted stones through the budding branches of the gnarled trees, they had more important thingsto think about than mere idle superstition. They feared it might be unpleasant work making theTerrible Old Man loquacious concerning his hoarded gold and silver, for aged sea-captains arenotably stubborn and perverse. Still, he was very old and very feeble, and there were two visitors.Messrs. Ricci and Silva were experienced in the art of making unwilling persons voluble, andthe screams of a weak and exceptionally venerable man can be easily muffled. So they moved upto the one lighted window and heard the Terrible Old Man talking childishly to his bottles withpendulums. Then they donned masks and knocked politely at the weather-stained oaken door.
Waiting seemed very long to Mr. Czanek as he fidgeted restlessly in the coveredmotor-car by the Terrible Old Man’s back gate in Ship Street. He was more than ordinarilytender-hearted, and he did not like the hideous screams he had heard in the ancient house justafter the hour appointed for the deed. Had he not told his colleagues to be as gentle as possiblewith the pathetic old sea-captain? Very nervously he watched that narrow oaken gate in the highand ivy-clad stone wall. Frequently he consulted his watch, and wondered at the delay. Had theold man died before revealing where his treasure was hidden, and had a thorough search becomenecessary? Mr. Czanek did not like to wait so long in the dark in such a place. Then he senseda soft tread or tapping on the walk inside the gate, heard a gentle fumbling at the rusty latch,and saw the narrow, heavy door swing inward. And in the pallid glow of the single dim street-lamphe strained his eyes to see what his colleagues had brought out of that sinister house whichloomed so close behind. But when he looked, he did not see what he had expected; for his colleagueswere not there at all, but only the Terrible Old Man leaning quietly on his knotted cane andsmiling hideously. Mr. Czanek had never before noticed the colour of that man’s eyes;now he saw that they were yellow.
Little things make considerable excitement in little towns, which is the reasonthat Kingsport people talked all that spring and summer about the three unidentifiable bodies,horribly slashed as with many cutlasses, and horribly mangled as by the tread of many cruelboot-heels, which the tide washed in. And some people even spoke of things as trivial as thedeserted motor-car found in Ship Street, or certain especially inhuman cries, probably of astray animal or migratory bird, heard in the night by wakeful citizens. But in this idle villagegossip the Terrible Old Man took no interest at all. He was by nature reserved, and when oneis aged and feeble one’s reserve is doubly strong. Besides, so ancient a sea-captain musthave witnessed scores of things much more stirring in the far-off days of his unremembered youth.
