Searchers after horror haunt strange, far places. For them are the catacombs of Ptolemais, andthe carven mausolea of the nightmare countries. They climb to the moonlit towers of ruined Rhinecastles, and falter down black cobwebbed steps beneath the scattered stones of forgotten citiesin Asia. The haunted wood and the desolate mountain are their shrines, and they linger aroundthe sinister monoliths on uninhabited islands. But the true epicure in the terrible, to whoma new thrill of unutterable ghastliness is the chief end and justification of existence, esteemsmost of all the ancient, lonely farmhouses of backwoods New England; for there the dark elementsof strength, solitude, grotesqueness, and ignorance combine to form the perfection of the hideous.
Most horrible of all sights are the little unpainted wooden houses remote fromtravelled ways, usually squatted upon some damp, grassy slope or leaning against some giganticoutcropping of rock. Two hundred years and more they have leaned or squatted there, while thevines have crawled and the trees have swelled and spread. They are almost hidden now in lawlessluxuriances of green and guardian shrouds of shadow; but the small-paned windows still stareshockingly, as if blinking through a lethal stupor which wards off madness by dulling the memoryof unutterable things.
In such houses have dwelt generations of strange people, whose like the worldhas never seen. Seized with a gloomy and fanatical belief which exiled them from their kind,their ancestors sought the wilderness for freedom. There the scions of a conquering race indeedflourished free from the restrictions of their fellows, but cowered in an appalling slaveryto the dismal phantasms of their own minds. Divorced from the enlightenment of civilisation,the strength of these Puritans turned into singular channels; and in their isolation, morbidself-repression, and struggle for life with relentless Nature, there came to them dark furtivetraits from the prehistoric depths of their cold Northern heritage. By necessity practical andby philosophy stern, these folk were not beautiful in their sins. Erring as all mortals must,they were forced by their rigid code to seek concealment above all else; so that they came touse less and less taste in what they concealed. Only the silent, sleepy, staring houses in thebackwoods can tell all that has lain hidden since the early days; and they are not communicative,being loath to shake off the drowsiness which helps them forget. Sometimes one feels that itwould be merciful to tear down these houses, for they must often dream.
It was to a time-battered edifice of this description that I was driven oneafternoon in November, 1896, by a rain of such chilling copiousness that any shelter was preferableto exposure. I had been travelling for some time amongst the people of the Miskatonic Valleyin quest of certain genealogical data; and from the remote, devious, and problematical natureof my course, had deemed it convenient to employ a bicycle despite the lateness of the season.Now I found myself upon an apparently abandoned road which I had chosen as the shortest cutto Arkham; overtaken by the storm at a point far from any town, and confronted with no refugesave the antique and repellent wooden building which blinked with bleared windows from betweentwo huge leafless elms near the foot of a rocky hill. Distant though it was from the remnantof a road, the house none the less impressed me unfavourably the very moment I espied it. Honest,wholesome structures do not stare at travellers so slyly and hauntingly, and in my genealogicalresearches I had encountered legends of a century before which biassed me against places ofthis kind. Yet the force of the elements was such as to overcome my scruples, and I did nothesitate to wheel my machine up the weedy rise to the closed door which seemed at once so suggestiveand secretive.
I had somehow taken it for granted that the house was abandoned, yet as I approachedit I was not so sure; for though the walks were indeed overgrown with weeds, they seemed toretain their nature a little too well to argue complete desertion. Therefore instead of tryingthe door I knocked, feeling as I did so a trepidation I could scarcely explain. As I waitedon the rough, mossy rock which served as a doorstep, I glanced at the neighbouring windows andthe panes of the transom above me, and noticed that although old, rattling, and almost opaquewith dirt, they were not broken. The building, then, must still be inhabited, despite its isolationand general neglect. However, my rapping evoked no response, so after repeating the summonsI tried the rusty latch and found the door unfastened. Inside was a little vestibule with wallsfrom which the plaster was falling, and through the doorway came a faint but peculiarly hatefulodour. I entered, carrying my bicycle, and closed the door behind me. Ahead rose a narrow staircase,flanked by a small door probably leading to the cellar, while to the left and right were closeddoors leading to rooms on the ground floor.
Leaning my cycle against the wall I opened the door at the left, and crossedinto a small low-ceiled chamber but dimly lighted by its two dusty windows and furnished inthe barest and most primitive possible way. It appeared to be a kind of sitting-room, for ithad a table and several chairs, and an immense fireplace above which ticked an antique clockon a mantel. Books and papers were very few, and in the prevailing gloom I could not readilydiscern the titles. What interested me was the uniform air of archaism as displayed in everyvisible detail. Most of the houses in this region I had found rich in relics of the past, buthere the antiquity was curiously complete; for in all the room I could not discover a singlearticle of definitely post-revolutionary date. Had the furnishings been less humble, the placewould have been a collector’s paradise.
As I surveyed this quaint apartment, I felt an increase in that aversion firstexcited by the bleak exterior of the house. Just what it was that I feared or loathed, I couldby no means define; but something in the whole atmosphere seemed redolent of unhallowed age,of unpleasant crudeness, and of secrets which should be forgotten. I felt disinclined to sitdown, and wandered about examining the various articles which I had noticed. The first objectof my curiosity was a book of medium size lying upon the table and presenting such an antediluvianaspect that I marvelled at beholding it outside a museum or library. It was bound in leatherwith metal fittings, and was in an excellent state of preservation; being altogether an unusualsort of volume to encounter in an abode so lowly. When I opened it to the title page my wondergrew even greater, for it proved to be nothing less rare than Pigafetta’s account of theCongo region, written in Latin from the notes of the sailor Lopez and printed at Frankfort in1598. I had often heard of this work, with its curious illustrations by the brothers De Bry,hence for a moment forgot my uneasiness in my desire to turn the pages before me. The engravingswere indeed interesting, drawn wholly from imagination and careless descriptions, and representednegroes with white skins and Caucasian features; nor would I soon have closed the book had notan exceedingly trivial circumstance upset my tired nerves and revived my sensation of disquiet.What annoyed me was merely the persistent way in which the volume tended to fall open of itselfat Plate XII, which represented in gruesome detail a butcher’s shop of the cannibal Anziques.I experienced some shame at my susceptibility to so slight a thing, but the drawing neverthelessdisturbed me, especially in connexion with some adjacent passages descriptive of Anzique gastronomy.
I had turned to a neighbouring shelf and was examining its meagre literarycontents—an eighteenth-century Bible, a Pilgrim’s Progress of like period,illustrated with grotesque woodcuts and printed by the almanack-maker Isaiah Thomas, the rottingbulk of Cotton Mather’s Magnalia Christi Americana, and a few other books of evidentlyequal age—when my attention was aroused by the unmistakable sound of walking in the roomoverhead. At first astonished and startled, considering the lack of response to my recent knockingat the door, I immediately afterward concluded that the walker had just awakened from a soundsleep; and listened with less surprise as the footsteps sounded on the creaking stairs. Thetread was heavy, yet seemed to contain a curious quality of cautiousness; a quality which Idisliked the more because the tread was heavy. When I had entered the room I had shut the doorbehind me. Now, after a moment of silence during which the walker may have been inspecting mybicycle in the hall, I heard a fumbling at the latch and saw the panelled portal swing openagain.
In the doorway stood a person of such singular appearance that I should haveexclaimed aloud but for the restraints of good breeding. Old, white-bearded, and ragged, myhost possessed a countenance and physique which inspired equal wonder and respect. His heightcould not have been less than six feet, and despite a general air of age and poverty he wasstout and powerful in proportion. His face, almost hidden by a long beard which grew high onthe cheeks, seemed abnormally ruddy and less wrinkled than one might expect; while over a highforehead fell a shock of white hair little thinned by the years. His blue eyes, though a triflebloodshot, seemed inexplicably keen and burning. But for his horrible unkemptness the man wouldhave been as distinguished-looking as he was impressive. This unkemptness, however, made himoffensive despite his face and figure. Of what his clothing consisted I could hardly tell, forit seemed to me no more than a mass of tatters surmounting a pair of high, heavy boots; andhis lack of cleanliness surpassed description.
The appearance of this man, and the instinctive fear he inspired, preparedme for something like enmity; so that I almost shuddered through surprise and a sense of uncannyincongruity when he motioned me to a chair and addressed me in a thin, weak voice full of fawningrespect and ingratiating hospitality. His speech was very curious, an extreme form of Yankeedialect I had thought long extinct; and I studied it closely as he sat down opposite me forconversation.
“Ketched in the rain, be ye?” he greeted. “Glad ye was nighthe haouse en’ hed the sense ta come right in. I calc’late I was asleep, else I’da heerd ye—I ain’t as young as I uster be, an’ I need a paowerful sight o’naps naowadays. Trav’lin’ fur? I hain’t seed many folks ’long this rudsence they tuk off the Arkham stage.”
I replied that I was going to Arkham, and apologised for my rude entry intohis domicile, whereupon he continued.
“Glad ta see ye, young Sir—new faces is scurce arount here, an’I hain’t got much ta cheer me up these days. Guess yew hail from Bosting, don’tye? I never ben thar, but I kin tell a taown man when I see ’im—we hed one fer deestrickschoolmaster in ’eighty-four, but he quit suddent an’ no one never heerd on ’imsence—” Here the old man lapsed into a kind of chuckle, and made no explanationwhen I questioned him. He seemed to be in an aboundingly good humour, yet to possess those eccentricitieswhich one might guess from his grooming. For some time he rambled on with an almost feverishgeniality, when it struck me to ask him how he came by so rare a book as Pigafetta’s Regnum Congo. The effect of this volume had not left me, and I felt a certain hesitancyin speaking of it; but curiosity overmastered all the vague fears which had steadily accumulatedsince my first glimpse of the house. To my relief, the question did not seem an awkward one;for the old man answered freely and volubly.
“Oh, thet Afriky book? Cap’n Ebenezer Holt traded me thet in ’sixty-eight—himas was kilt in the war.” Something about the name of Ebenezer Holt caused me to look upsharply. I had encountered it in my genealogical work, but not in any record since the Revolution.I wondered if my host could help me in the task at which I was labouring, and resolved to askhim about it later on. He continued.
“Ebenezer was on a Salem merchantman for years, an’ picked up asight o’ queer stuff in every port. He got this in London, I guess—he uster liketer buy things at the shops. I was up ta his haouse onct, on the hill, tradin’ hosses,when I see this book. I relished the picters, so he give it in on a swap. ’Tis a queerbook—here, leave me git on my spectacles—” The old man fumbled among his rags,producing a pair of dirty and amazingly antique glasses with small octagonal lenses and steelbows. Donning these, he reached for the volume on the table and turned the pages lovingly.
“Ebenezer cud read a leetle o’ this—’tis Latin—butI can’t. I hed two er three schoolmasters read me a bit, and Passon Clark, him they saygot draownded in the pond—kin yew make anything outen it?” I told him that I could,and translated for his benefit a paragraph near the beginning. If I erred, he was not scholarenough to correct me; for he seemed childishly pleased at my English version. His proximitywas becoming rather obnoxious, yet I saw no way to escape without offending him. I was amusedat the childish fondness of this ignorant old man for the pictures in a book he could not read,and wondered how much better he could read the few books in English which adorned the room.This revelation of simplicity removed much of the ill-defined apprehension I had felt, and Ismiled as my host rambled on:
“Queer haow picters kin set a body thinkin’. Take this un herenear the front. Hev yew ever seed trees like thet, with big leaves a-floppin’ over an’daown? And them men—them can’t be niggers—they dew beat all. Kinder like Injuns,I guess, even ef they be in Afriky. Some o’ these here critters looks like monkeys, orhalf monkeys an’ half men, but I never heerd o’ nothing like this un.” Herehe pointed to a fabulous creature of the artist, which one might describe as a sort of dragonwith the head of an alligator.
“But naow I’ll shew ye the best un—over here nigh the middle—”The old man’s speech grew a trifle thicker and his eyes assumed a brighter glow; but hisfumbling hands, though seemingly clumsier than before, were entirely adequate to their mission.The book fell open, almost of its own accord and as if from frequent consultation at this place,to the repellent twelfth plate shewing a butcher’s shop amongst the Anzique cannibals.My sense of restlessness returned, though I did not exhibit it. The especially bizarre thingwas that the artist had made his Africans look like white men—the limbs and quarters hangingabout the walls of the shop were ghastly, while the butcher with his axe was hideously incongruous.But my host seemed to relish the view as much as I disliked it.
“What d’ye think o’ this—ain’t never see thelike hereabouts, eh? When I see this I telled Eb Holt, ‘That’s suthin’ tastir ye up an’ make yer blood tickle!’ When I read in Scripter about slayin’—likethem Midianites was slew—I kinder think things, but I ain’t got no picter of it.Here a body kin see all they is to it—I s’pose ’tis sinful, but ain’twe all born an’ livin’ in sin?—Thet feller bein’ chopped up gives mea tickle every time I look at ’im—I hev ta keep lookin’ at ’im—seewhar the butcher cut off his feet? Thar’s his head on thet bench, with one arm side ofit, an’ t’other arm’s on the graound side o’ the meat block.”
As the man mumbled on in his shocking ecstasy the expression on his hairy,spectacled face became indescribable, but his voice sank rather than mounted. My own sensationscan scarcely be recorded. All the terror I had dimly felt before rushed upon me actively andvividly, and I knew that I loathed the ancient and abhorrent creature so near me with an infiniteintensity. His madness, or at least his partial perversion, seemed beyond dispute. He was almostwhispering now, with a huskiness more terrible than a scream, and I trembled as I listened.
“As I says, ’tis queer haow picters sets ye thinkin’. D’yeknow, young Sir, I’m right sot on this un here. Arter I got the book off Eb I uster lookat it a lot, especial when I’d heerd Passon Clark rant o’ Sundays in his big wig.Onct I tried suthin’ funny—here, young Sir, don’t git skeert—all I donewas ter look at the picter afore I kilt the sheep for market—killin’ sheep was kindermore fun arter lookin’ at it—” The tone of the old man now sank very low,sometimes becoming so faint that his words were hardly audible. I listened to the rain, andto the rattling of the bleared, small-paned windows, and marked a rumbling of approaching thunderquite unusual for the season. Once a terrific flash and peal shook the frail house to its foundations,but the whisperer seemed not to notice it.
“Killin’ sheep was kinder more fun—but d’ye know,’twan’t quite satisfyin’. Queer haow a cravin’ gits a holt onye— As ye love the Almighty, young man, don’t tell nobody, but I swar ter Gawd thetpicter begun ta make me hungry fer victuals I couldn’t raise nor buy—here, setstill, what’s ailin’ ye?—I didn’t do nothin’, only I wondered haow’twud be ef I did— They say meat makes blood an’ flesh, an’ gives yenew life, so I wondered ef ’twudn’t make a man live longer an’ longer ef’twas more the same—” But the whisperer never continued. The interruptionwas not produced by my fright, nor by the rapidly increasing storm amidst whose fury I waspresently to open my eyes on a smoky solitude of blackened ruins. It was produced by a very simplethough somewhat unusual happening.
The open book lay flat between us, with the picture staring repulsively upward.As the old man whispered the words “more the same” a tiny spattering impactwas heard, and something shewed on the yellowed paper of the upturned volume. I thought of therain and of a leaky roof, but rain is not red. On the butcher’s shop of the Anzique cannibalsa small red spattering glistened picturesquely, lending vividness to the horror of the engraving.The old man saw it, and stopped whispering even before my expression of horror made it necessary;saw it and glanced quickly toward the floor of the room he had left an hour before. I followedhis glance, and beheld just above us on the loose plaster of the ancient ceiling a large irregularspot of wet crimson which seemed to spread even as I viewed it. I did not shriek or move, butmerely shut my eyes. A moment later came the titanic thunderbolt of thunderbolts; blasting thataccursed house of unutterable secrets and bringing the oblivion which alone saved my mind.
