I have never heard an even approximately adequate explanation of the horror at Martin’sBeach. Despite the large number of witnesses, no two accounts agree; and the testimony takenby local authorities contains the most amazing discrepancies.
Perhaps this haziness is natural in view of the unheard-of character of thehorror itself, the almost paralytic terror of all who saw it, and the efforts made by the fashionableWavecrest Inn to hush it up after the publicity created by Prof. Alton’s article “AreHypnotic Powers Confined to Recognized Humanity?”
Against all these obstacles I am striving to present a coherent version; forI beheld the hideous occurrence, and believe it should be known in view of the appalling possibilitiesit suggests. Martin’s Beach is once more popular as a watering-place, but I shudder whenI think of it. Indeed, I cannot look at the ocean at all now without shuddering.
Fate is not always without a sense of drama and climax, hence the terriblehappening of August 8, 1922, swiftly followed a period of minor and agreeably wonder-fraughtexcitement at Martin’s Beach. On May 17 the crew of the fishing smack Alma of Gloucester,under Capt. James P. Orne, killed, after a battle of nearly forty hours, a marine monster whosesize and aspect produced the greatest possible stir in scientific circles and caused certainBoston naturalists to take every precaution for its taxidermic preservation.
The object was some fifty feet in length, of roughly cylindrical shape, andabout ten feet in diameter. It was unmistakably a gilled fish in its major affiliations; butwith certain curious modifications, such as rudimentary forelegs and six-toed feet in placeof pectoral fins, which prompted the widest speculation. Its extraordinary mouth, its thickand scaly hide, and its single, deep-set eye were wonders scarcely less remarkable than itscolossal dimensions; and when the naturalists pronounced it an infant organism, which couldnot have been hatched more than a few days, public interest mounted to extraordinary heights.
Capt. Orne, with typical Yankee shrewdness, obtained a vessel large enoughto hold the object in its hull, and arranged for the exhibition of his prize. With judiciouscarpentry he prepared what amounted to an excellent marine museum, and, sailing south to thewealthy resort district of Martin’s Beach, anchored at the hotel wharf and reaped a harvestof admission fees.
The intrinsic marvelousness of the object, and the importance which it clearlybore in the minds of many scientific visitors from near and far, combined to make it the season’ssensation. That it was absolutely unique—unique to a scientifically revolutionary degree—waswell understood. The naturalists had shown plainly that it radically differed from the similarlyimmense fish caught off the Florida coast; that, while it was obviously an inhabitant of almostincredible depths, perhaps thousands of feet, its brain and principal organs indicated a developmentstartlingly vast, and out of all proportion to anything hitherto associated with the fish tribe.
On the morning of July 20 the sensation was increased by the loss of the vesseland its strange treasure. In the storm of the preceding night it had broken from its mooringsand vanished forever from the sight of man, carrying with it the guard who had slept aboarddespite the threatening weather. Capt. Orne, backed by extensive scientific interests and aidedby large numbers of fishing boats from Gloucester, made a thorough and exhaustive searchingcruise, but with no result other than the prompting of interest and conversation. By August7 hope was abandoned, and Capt. Orne had returned to the Wavecrest Inn to wind up his businessaffairs at Martin’s Beach and confer with certain of the scientific men who remained there.The horror came on August 8.
It was in the twilight, when grey sea-birds hovered low near the shore anda rising moon began to make a glittering path across the waters. The scene is important to remember,for every impression counts. On the beach were several strollers and a few late bathers; stragglersfrom the distant cottage colony that rose modestly on a green hill to the north, or from theadjacent cliff-perched Inn whose imposing towers proclaimed its allegiance to wealth and grandeur.
Well within viewing distance was another set of spectators, the loungers onthe Inn’s high-ceiled and lantern-lighted veranda, who appeared to be enjoying the dancemusic from the sumptuous ballroom inside. These spectators, who included Capt. Orne and hisgroup of scientific confreres, joined the beach group before the horror progressed far; as didmany more from the Inn. Certainly there was no lack of witnesses, confused though their storiesbe with fear and doubt of what they saw.
There is no exact record of the time the thing began, although a majority saythat the fairly round moon was “about a foot” above the low-lying vapors of the horizon.They mention the moon because what they saw seemed subtly connected with it—a sort of stealthy,deliberate, menacing ripple which rolled in from the far skyline along the shimmering lane ofreflected moonbeams, yet which seemed to subside before it reached the shore.
Many did not notice this ripple until reminded by later events; but it seemsto have been very marked, differing in height and motion from the normal waves around it.Some called it cunning and calculating. And as it died away craftily by the blackreefs afar out, there suddenly came belching up out of the glitter-streaked brine a cry of death;a scream of anguish and despair that moved pity even while it mocked it.
First to respond to the cry were the two life guards then on duty; sturdy fellowsin white bathing attire, with their calling proclaimed in large red letters across their chests.Accustomed as they were to rescue work, and to the screams of the drowning, they could findnothing familiar in the unearthly ululation; yet with a trained sense of duty they ignored thestrangeness and proceeded to follow their usual course.
Hastily seizing an air-cushion, which with its attached coil of rope lay alwaysat hand, one of them ran swiftly along the shore to the scene of the gathering crowd; whence,after whirling it about to gain momentum, he flung the hollow disc far out in the directionfrom which the sound had come. As the cushion disappeared in the waves, the crowd curiouslyawaited a sight of the hapless being whose distress had been so great; eager to see the rescuemade by the massive rope.
But that rescue was soon acknowledged to be no swift and easy matter; for,pull as they might on the rope, the two muscular guards could not move the object at the otherend. Instead, they found that object pulling with equal or even greater force in the very oppositedirection, till in a few seconds they were dragged off their feet and into the water by thestrange power which had seized on the proffered life-preserver.
One of them, recovering himself, called immediately for help from the crowdon the shore, to whom he flung the remaining coil of rope; and in a moment the guards were secondedby all the hardier men, among whom Capt. Orne was foremost. More than a dozen strong hands werenow tugging desperately at the stout line, yet wholly without avail.
Hard as they tugged, the strange force at the other end tugged harder; andsince neither side relaxed for an instant, the rope became rigid as steel with the enormousstrain. The struggling participants, as well as the spectators, were by this time consumed withcuriosity as to the nature of the force in the sea. The idea of a drowning man had long beendismissed; and hints of whales, submarines, monsters, and demons now passed freely around. Wherehumanity had first led the rescuers, wonder kept them at their task; and they hauled with agrim determination to uncover the mystery.
It being decided at last that a whale must have swallowed the air-cushion,Capt. Orne, as a natural leader, shouted to those on the shore that a boat must be obtainedin order to approach, harpoon, and land the unseen leviathan. Several men at once prepared toscatter in quest of a suitable craft, while others came to supplant the captain at the strainingrope, since his place was logically with whatever boat party might be formed. His own idea ofthe situation was very broad, and by no means limited to whales, since he had to do with a monsterso much stranger. He wondered what might be the acts and manifestations of an adult of the speciesof which the fifty-foot creature had been the merest infant.
And now there developed with appalling suddenness the crucial fact which changedthe entire scene from one of wonder to one of horror, and dazed with fright the assembled bandof toilers and onlookers. Capt. Orne, turning to leave his post at the rope, found his handsheld in their place with unaccountable strength; and in a moment he realized that he was unableto let go of the rope. His plight was instantly divined, and as each companion tested his ownsituation the same condition was encountered. The fact could not be denied—every strugglerwas irresistibly held in some mysterious bondage to the hempen line which was slowly, hideously,and relentlessly pulling them out to sea.
Speechless horror ensued; a horror in which the spectators were petrified toutter inaction and mental chaos. Their complete demoralization is reflected in the conflictingaccounts they give, and the sheepish excuses they offer for their seemingly callous inertia.I was one of them, and know.
Even the strugglers, after a few frantic screams and futile groans, succumbedto the paralyzing influence and kept silent and fatalistic in the face of unknown powers. Therethey stood in the pallid moonlight, blindly pulling against a spectral doom and swaying monotonouslybackward and forward as the water rose first to their knees, then to their hips. The moon wentpartly under a cloud, and in the half-light the line of swaying men resembled some sinisterand gigantic centipede, writhing in the clutch of a terrible creeping death.
Harder and harder grew the rope, as the tug in both directions increased, andthe strands swelled with the undisturbed soaking of the rising waves. Slowly the tide advanced,till the sands so lately peopled by laughing children and whispering lovers were now swallowedby the inexorable flow. The herd of panic-stricken watchers surged blindly backward as the watercrept above their feet, while the frightful line of strugglers swayed hideously on, half submerged,and now at a substantial distance from their audience. Silence was complete.
The crowd, having gained a huddling-place beyond reach of the tide, staredin mute fascination; without offering a word of advice or encouragement, or attempting any kindof assistance. There was in the air a nightmare fear of impending evils such as the world hadnever before known.
Minutes seemed lengthened into hours, and still that human snake of swayingtorsos was seen above the fast rising tide. Rhythmically it undulated; slowly, horribly, withthe seal of doom upon it. Thicker clouds now passed over the ascending moon, and the glitteringpath on the waters faded nearly out.
Very dimly writhed the serpentine line of nodding heads, with now and thenthe livid face of a backward-glancing victim gleaming pale in the darkness. Faster and fastergathered the clouds, till at length their angry rifts shot down sharp tongues of febrile flame.Thunders rolled, softly at first, yet soon increasing to a deafening, maddening intensity. Thencame a culminating crash—a shock whose reverberations seemed to shake land and sea alike—andon its heels a cloudburst whose drenching violence overpowered the darkened world as if theheavens themselves had opened to pour forth a vindictive torrent.
The spectators, instinctively acting despite the absence of conscious and coherentthought, now retreated up the cliff steps to the hotel veranda. Rumors had reached the guestsinside, so that the refugees found a state of terror nearly equal to their own. I think a few frightenedwords were uttered, but cannot be sure.
Some, who were staying at the Inn, retired in terror to their rooms; whileothers remained to watch the fast sinking victims as the line of bobbing heads showed abovethe mounting waves in the fitful lightning flashes. I recall thinking of those heads, and thebulging eyes they must contain; eyes that might well reflect all the fright, panic, and deliriumof a malignant universe—all the sorrow, sin, and misery, blasted hopes and unfulfilleddesires, fear, loathing and anguish of the ages since time’s beginning; eyes alight withall the soul-racking pain of eternally blazing infernos.
And as I gazed out beyond the heads, my fancy conjured up still another eye;a single eye, equally alight, yet with a purpose so revolting to my brain that the vision soonpassed. Held in the clutches of an unknown vise, the line of the damned dragged on; their silentscreams and unuttered prayers known only to the demons of the black waves and the night-wind.
There now burst from the infuriate sky such a mad cataclysm of satanic soundthat even the former crash seemed dwarfed. Amidst a blinding glare of descending fire the voiceof heaven resounded with the blasphemies of hell, and the mingled agony of all the lost reverberatedin one apocalyptic, planet-rending peal of Cyclopean din. It was the end of the storm, for withuncanny suddenness the rain ceased and the moon once more cast her pallid beams on a strangelyquieted sea.
There was no line of bobbing heads now. The waters were calm and deserted,and broken only by the fading ripples of what seemed to be a whirlpool far out in the path ofthe moonlight whence the strange cry had first come. But as I looked along that treacherouslane of silvery sheen, with fancy fevered and senses overwrought, there trickled upon my earsfrom some abysmal sunken waste the faint and sinister echoes of a laugh.
