I.

It was languid curiosity which first brought Stephen Jones to Rogers’ Museum. Someone hadtold him about the queer underground place in Southwark Street across the river, where waxenthings so much more horrible than the worst effigies at Madame Tussaud’s were shewn, andhe had strolled in one April day to see how disappointing he would find it. Oddly, he was notdisappointed. There was something different and distinctive here, after all. Of course, theusual gory commonplaces were present—Landru, Dr. Crippen, Madame Demers, Rizzio, Lady JaneGrey, endless maimed victims of war and revolution, and monsters like Gilles de Rais and Marquisde Sade—but there were other things which had made him breathe faster and stay till theringing of the closing bell. The man who had fashioned this collection could be no ordinarymountebank. There was imagination—even a kind of diseased genius—in some of this stuff.
Later he had learned about George Rogers. The man had been on the Tussaud staff,but some trouble had developed which led to his discharge. There were aspersions on his sanityand tales of his crazy forms of secret worship—though latterly his success with his ownbasement museum had dulled the edge of some criticisms while sharpening the insidious pointof others. Teratology and the iconography of nightmare were his hobbies, and even he had hadthe prudence to screen off some of his worst effigies in a special alcove for adults only. Itwas this alcove which had fascinated Jones so much. There were lumpish hybrid things which onlyfantasy could spawn, moulded with devilish skill, and coloured in a horribly life-like fashion.
Some were the figures of well-known myth—gorgons, chimaeras, dragons,cyclops, and all their shuddersome congeners. Others were drawn from darker and more furtivelywhispered cycles of subterranean legend—black, formless Tsathoggua, many-tentacled Cthulhu,proboscidian Chaugnar Faugn, and other rumoured blasphemies from forbidden books like the Necronomicon, the Book of Eibon, or the Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt.But the worst were wholly original with Rogers, and represented shapes which no tale of antiquityhad ever dared to suggest. Several were hideous parodies on forms of organic life we know, whileothers seemed taken from feverish dreams of other planets and other galaxies. The wilder paintingsof Clark Ashton Smith might suggest a few—but nothing could suggest the effect of poignant,loathsome terror created by their great size and fiendishly cunning workmanship, and by thediabolically clever lighting conditions under which they were exhibited.
Stephen Jones, as a leisurely connoisseur of the bizarre in art, had soughtout Rogers himself in the dingy office and workroom behind the vaulted museum chamber—anevil-looking crypt lighted dimly by dusty windows set slit-like and horizontal in the brickwall on a level with the ancient cobblestones of a hidden courtyard. It was here that the imageswere repaired—here, too, where some of them had been made. Waxen arms, legs, heads, andtorsos lay in grotesque array on various benches, while on high tiers of shelves matted wigs,ravenous-looking teeth, and glassy, staring eyes were indiscriminately scattered. Costumes ofall sorts hung from hooks, and in one alcove were great piles of flesh-coloured wax-cakes andshelves filled with paint-cans and brushes of every description. In the centre of the room wasa large melting-furnace used to prepare the wax for moulding, its fire-box topped by a hugeiron container on hinges, with a spout which permitted the pouring of melted wax with the meresttouch of a finger.
Other things in the dismal crypt were less describable—isolated partsof problematical entities whose assembled forms were the phantoms of delirium. At one end wasa door of heavy plank, fastened by an unusually large padlock and with a very peculiar symbolpainted over it. Jones, who had once had access to the dreaded Necronomicon, shiveredinvoluntarily as he recognised that symbol. This showman, he reflected, must indeed be a personof disconcertingly wide scholarship in dark and dubious fields.
Nor did the conversation of Rogers disappoint him. The man was tall, lean,and rather unkempt, with large black eyes which gazed combustively from a pallid and usuallystubble-covered face. He did not resent Jones’s intrusion, but seemed to welcome the chanceof unburdening himself to an interested person. His voice was of singular depth and resonance,and harboured a sort of repressed intensity bordering on the feverish. Jones did not wonderthat many had thought him mad.
With every successive call—and such calls became a habit as the weekswent by—Jones had found Rogers more communicative and confidential. From the first therehad been hints of strange faiths and practices on the showman’s part, and later on thesehints expanded into tales—despite a few odd corroborative photographs—whose extravagancewas almost comic. It was some time in June, on a night when Jones had brought a bottle of goodwhiskey and plied his host somewhat freely, that the really demented talk first appeared. Beforethat there had been wild enough stories—accounts of mysterious trips to Thibet, the Africaninterior, the Arabian desert, the Amazon valley, Alaska, and certain little-known islands ofthe South Pacific, plus claims of having read such monstrous and half-fabulous books as theprehistoric Pnakotic fragments and the Dhol chants attributed to malign and non-human Leng—butnothing in all this had been so unmistakably insane as what had cropped out that June eveningunder the spell of the whiskey.
To be plain, Rogers began making vague boasts of having found certain thingsin Nature that no one had found before, and of having brought back tangible evidences of suchdiscoveries. According to his bibulous harangue, he had gone farther than anyone else in interpretingthe obscure and primal books he studied, and had been directed by them to certain remote placeswhere strange survivals are hidden—survivals of aeons and life-cycles earlier than mankind,and in some cases connected with other dimensions and other worlds, communication with whichwas frequent in the forgotten pre-human days. Jones marvelled at the fancy which could conjureup such notions, and wondered just what Rogers’ mental history had been. Had his work amidstthe morbid grotesqueries of Madame Tussaud’s been the start of his imaginative flights,or was the tendency innate, so that his choice of occupation was merely one of its manifestations?At any rate, the man’s work was very closely linked with his notions. Even now there wasno mistaking the trend of his blackest hints about the nightmare monstrosities in the screened-off“Adults only” alcove. Heedless of ridicule, he was trying to imply that not all ofthese daemoniac abnormalities were artificial.
It was Jones’s frank scepticism and amusement at these irresponsible claimswhich broke up the growing cordiality. Rogers, it was clear, took himself very seriously; forhe now became morose and resentful, continuing to tolerate Jones only through a dogged urgeto break down his wall of urbane and complacent incredulity. Wild tales and suggestions of ritesand sacrifices to nameless elder gods continued, and now and then Rogers would lead his guestto one of the hideous blasphemies in the screened-off alcove and point out features difficultto reconcile with even the finest human craftsmanship. Jones continued his visits through sheerfascination, though he knew he had forfeited his host’s regard. At times he would try tohumour Rogers with pretended assent to some mad hint or assertion, but the gaunt showman wasseldom to be deceived by such tactics.
The tension came to a head later in September. Jones had casually dropped intothe museum one afternoon, and was wandering through the dim corridors whose horrors were nowso familiar, when he heard a very peculiar sound from the general direction of Rogers’workroom. Others heard it, too, and started nervously as the echoes reverberated through thegreat vaulted basement. The three attendants exchanged odd glances; and one of them, a dark,taciturn, foreign-looking fellow who always served Rogers as a repairer and assistant designer,smiled in a way which seemed to puzzle his colleagues and which grated very harshly on somefacet of Jones’s sensibilities. It was the yelp or scream of a dog, and was such a soundas could be made only under conditions of the utmost fright and agony combined. Its stark, anguishedfrenzy was appalling to hear, and in this setting of grotesque abnormality it held a doublehideousness. Jones remembered that no dogs were allowed in the museum.
He was about to go to the door leading into the workroom, when the dark attendantstopped him with a word and a gesture. Mr. Rogers, the man said in a soft, somewhat accentedvoice at once apologetic and vaguely sardonic, was out, and there were standing orders to admitno one to the workroom during his absence. As for that yelp, it was undoubtedly something outin the courtyard behind the museum. This neighbourhood was full of stray mongrels, and theirfights were sometimes shockingly noisy. There were no dogs in any part of the museum. But ifMr. Jones wished to see Mr. Rogers he might find him just before closing-time.
After this Jones climbed the old stone steps to the street outside and examinedthe squalid neighbourhood curiously. The leaning, decrepit buildings—once dwellings butnow largely shops and warehouses—were very ancient indeed. Some of them were of a gabledtype seeming to go back to Tudor times, and a faint miasmatic stench hung subtly about the wholeregion. Beside the dingy house whose basement held the museum was a low archway pierced by adark cobbled alley, and this Jones entered in a vague wish to find the courtyard behind theworkroom and settle the affair of the dog more comfortably in his mind. The courtyard was dimin the late afternoon light, hemmed in by rear walls even uglier and more intangibly menacingthan the crumbling street facades of the evil old houses. Not a dog was in sight, and Joneswondered how the aftermath of such a frantic turmoil could have completely vanished so soon.
Despite the assistant’s statement that no dog had been in the museum,Jones glanced nervously at the three small windows of the basement workroom—narrow, horizontalrectangles close to the grass-grown pavement, with grimy panes that stared repulsively and incuriouslylike the eyes of dead fish. To their left a worn flight of steps led to an opaque and heavilybolted door. Some impulse urged him to crouch low on the damp, broken cobblestones and peerin, on the chance that the thick green shades, worked by long cords that hung down to a reachablelevel, might not be drawn. The outer surfaces were thick with dirt, but as he rubbed them withhis handkerchief he saw there was no obscuring curtain in the way of his vision.
So shadowed was the cellar from the inside that not much could be made out,but the grotesque working paraphernalia now and then loomed up spectrally as Jones tried eachof the windows in turn. It seemed evident at first that no one was within; yet when he peeredthrough the extreme right-hand window—the one nearest the entrance alley—he saw aglow of light at the farther end of the apartment which made him pause in bewilderment. Therewas no reason why any light should be there. It was an inner side of the room, and he couldnot recall any gas or electric fixture near that point. Another look defined the glow as a largevertical rectangle, and a thought occurred to him. It was in that direction that he had alwaysnoticed the heavy plank door with the abnormally large padlock—the door which was neveropened, and above which was crudely smeared that hideous cryptic symbol from the fragmentaryrecords of forbidden elder magic. It must be open now—and there was a light inside. Allhis former speculations as to where that door led, and as to what lay behind it, were now renewedwith trebly disquieting force.
Jones wandered aimlessly around the dismal locality till close to six o’clock,when he returned to the museum to make the call on Rogers. He could hardly tell why he wishedso especially to see the man just then, but there must have been some subconscious misgivingsabout that terribly unplaceable canine scream of the afternoon, and about the glow of lightin that disturbing and usually unopened inner doorway with the heavy padlock. The attendantswere leaving as he arrived, and he thought that Orabona—the dark foreign-looking assistant—eyedhim with something like sly, repressed amusement. He did not relish that look—even thoughhe had seen the fellow turn it on his employer many times.
The vaulted exhibition room was ghoulish in its desertion, but he strode quicklythrough it and rapped at the door of the office and workroom. Response was slow in coming, thoughthere were footsteps inside. Finally, in response to a second knock, the lock rattled, and theancient six-panelled portal creaked reluctantly open to reveal the slouching, feverish-eyedform of George Rogers. From the first it was clear that the showman was in an unusual mood.There was a curious mixture of reluctance and actual gloating in his welcome, and his talk atonce veered to extravagances of the most hideous and incredible sort.
Surviving elder gods—nameless sacrifices—the other than artificialnature of some of the alcove horrors—all the usual boasts, but uttered in a tone of peculiarlyincreasing confidence. Obviously, Jones reflected, the poor fellow’s madness was gainingon him. From time to time Rogers would send furtive glances toward the heavy, padlocked innerdoor at the end of the room, or toward a piece of coarse burlap on the floor not far from it,beneath which some small object appeared to be lying. Jones grew more nervous as the momentspassed, and began to feel as hesitant about mentioning the afternoon’s oddities as he hadformerly been anxious to do so.
Rogers’ sepulchrally resonant bass almost cracked under the excitementof his fevered rambling.
“Do you remember,” he shouted, “what I told you about that ruinedcity in Indo-China where the Tcho-Tchos lived? You had to admit I’d been there when yousaw the photographs, even if you did think I made that oblong swimmer in darkness out of wax.If you’d seen it writhing in the underground pools as I did.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
“Well, this is bigger still. I never told you about this, because I wantedto work out the later parts before making any claim. When you see the snapshots you’llknow the geography couldn’t have been faked, and I fancy I have another way of provingthat It isn’t any waxed concoction of mine. You’ve never seen it, for the experimentswouldn’t let me keep It on exhibition.”
The showman glanced queerly at the padlocked door.
“It all comes from that long ritual in the eighth Pnakotic fragment. WhenI got it figured out I saw it could have only one meaning. There were things in the north beforethe land of Lomar—before mankind existed—and this was one of them. It took us allthe way to Alaska, and up the Noatak from Fort Morton, but the thing was there as we knew itwould be. Great Cyclopean ruins, acres of them. There was less left than we had hoped for, butafter three million years what could one expect? And weren’t the Esquimau legends all inthe right direction? We couldn’t get one of the beggars to go with us, and had to sledgeall the way back to Nome for Americans. Orabona was no good up in that climate—it madehim sullen and hateful.
“I’ll tell you later how we found It. When we got the ice blastedout of the pylons of the central ruin the stairway was just as we knew it would be. Some carvingsstill there, and it was no trouble keeping the Yankees from following us in. Orabona shiveredlike a leaf—you’d never think it from the damned insolent way he struts around here.He knew enough of the Elder Lore to be properly afraid. The eternal light was gone, but ourtorches shewed enough. We saw the bones of others who had been before us—aeons ago, whenthe climate was warm. Some of these bones were of things you couldn’t even imagine. Atthe third level down we found the ivory throne the fragments said so much about—and I mayas well tell you it wasn’t empty.
“The thing on that throne didn’t move—and we knew then thatIt needed the nourishment of sacrifice. But we didn’t want to wake It then. Better to getIt to London first. Orabona and I went to the surface for the big box, but when we had packedit we couldn’t get It up the three flights of steps. These steps weren’t made forhuman beings, and their size bothered us. Anyway, it was devilish heavy. We had to have theAmericans down to get It out. They weren’t anxious to go into the place, but of coursethe worst thing was safely inside the box. We told them it was a batch of ivory carvings—archaeologicalstuff; and after seeing the carved throne they probably believed us. It’s a wonder theydidn’t suspect hidden treasure and demand a share. They must have told queer tales aroundNome later on; though I doubt if they ever went back to those ruins, even for the ivory throne.”
Rogers paused, felt around in his desk, and produced an envelope of good-sizedphotographic prints. Extracting one and laying it face down before him, he handed the rest toJones. The set was certainly an odd one: ice-clad hills, dog sledges, men in furs, and vasttumbled ruins against a background of snow—ruins whose bizarre outlines and enormous stoneblocks could hardly be accounted for. One flashlight view shewed an incredible interior chamberwith wild carvings and a curious throne whose proportion could not have been designed for ahuman occupant. The carvings on the gigantic masonry—high walls and peculiar vaulting overhead—weremainly symbolic, and involved both wholly unknown designs and certain hieroglyphs darkly citedin obscene legends. Over the throne loomed the same dreadful symbol which was now painted onthe workroom wall above the padlocked plank door. Jones darted a nervous glance at the closedportal. Assuredly, Rogers had been to strange places and had seen strange things. Yet this madinterior picture might easily be a fraud—taken from a very clever stage setting. One mustnot be too credulous. But Rogers was continuing:
“Well, we shipped the box from Nome and got to London without any trouble.That was the first time we’d ever brought back anything that had a chance of coming alive.I didn’t put It on display, because there were more important things to do for It. It neededthe nourishment of sacrifice, for It was a god. Of course I couldn’t get It the sort ofsacrifices which It used to have in Its day, for such things don’t exist now. But therewere other things which might do. The blood is the life, you know. Even the lemurs and elementalsthat are older than the earth will come when the blood of men or beasts is offered under theright conditions.”
The expression on the narrator’s face was growing very alarming and repulsive,so that Jones fidgeted involuntarily in his chair. Rogers seemed to notice his guest’snervousness, and continued with a distinctly evil smile.
“It was last year that I got It, and ever since then I’ve been tryingrites and sacrifices. Orabona hasn’t been much help, for he was always against the ideaof waking It. He hates It—probably because he’s afraid of what It will come to mean.He carries a pistol all the time to protect himself—fool, as if there were human protectionagainst It! If I ever see him draw that pistol, I’ll strangle him. He wanted me to killIt and make an effigy of It. But I’ve stuck by my plans, and I’m coming out on topin spite of all the cowards like Orabona and damned sniggering sceptics like you, Jones! I’vechanted the rites and made certain sacrifices, and last week the transition came. Thesacrifice was—received and enjoyed!”
Rogers actually licked his lips, while Jones held himself uneasily rigid. Theshowman paused and rose, crossing the room to the piece of burlap at which he had glanced sooften. Bending down, he took hold of one corner as he spoke again.
“You’ve laughed enough at my work—now it’s time for youto get some facts. Orabona tells me you heard a dog screaming around here this afternoon. Do you know what that meant?”
Jones started. For all his curiosity he would have been glad to get out withoutfurther light on the point which had so puzzled him. But Rogers was inexorable, and began tolift the square of burlap. Beneath it lay a crushed, almost shapeless mass which Jones was slowto classify. Was it a once-living thing which some agency had flattened, sucked dry of blood,punctured in a thousand places, and wrung into a limp, broken-boned heap of grotesqueness? Aftera moment Jones realised what it must be. It was what was left of a dog—a dog, perhaps ofconsiderable size and whitish colour. Its breed was past recognition, for distortion had comein nameless and hideous ways. Most of the hair was burned off as by some pungent acid, and theexposed, bloodless skin was riddled by innumerable circular wounds or incisions. The form oftorture necessary to cause such results was past imagining.
Electrified with a pure loathing which conquered his mounting disgust, Jonessprang up with a cry.
“You damned sadist—you madman—you do a thing like this and dareto speak to a decent man!”
Rogers dropped the burlap with a malignant sneer and faced his oncoming guest.His words held an unnatural calm.
“Why, you fool, do you think I did this? Let us admit that theresults are unbeautiful from our limited human standpoint. What of it? It is not human and doesnot pretend to be. To sacrifice is merely to offer. I gave the dog to It. What happenedis Its work, not mine. It needed the nourishment of the offering, and took it in Itsown way. But let me shew you what It looks like.”
As Jones stood hesitating, the speaker returned to his desk and took up thephotograph he had laid face down without shewing. Now he extended it with a curious look. Jonestook it and glanced at it in an almost mechanical way. After a moment the visitor’s glancebecame sharper and more absorbed, for the utterly satanic force of the object depicted had analmost hypnotic effect. Certainly, Rogers had outdone himself in modelling the eldritch nightmarewhich the camera had caught. The thing was a work of sheer, infernal genius, and Jones wonderedhow the public would react when it was placed on exhibition. So hideous a thing had no rightto exist—probably the mere contemplation of it, after it was done, had completed the unhingingof its maker’s mind and led him to worship it with brutal sacrifices. Only a stout sanitycould resist the insidious suggestion that the blasphemy was—or had once been—somemorbid and exotic form of actual life.
The thing in the picture squatted or was balanced on what appeared to be aclever reproduction of the monstrously carved throne in the other curious photograph. To describeit with any ordinary vocabulary would be impossible, for nothing even roughly correspondingto it has ever come within the imagination of sane mankind. It represented something meant perhapsto be roughly connected with the vertebrates of this planet—though one could not be toosure of that. Its bulk was Cyclopean, for even squatted it towered to almost twice the heightof Orabona, who was shewn beside it. Looking sharply, one might trace its approximations towardthe bodily features of the higher vertebrates.
There was an almost globular torso, with six long, sinuous limbs terminatingin crab-like claws. From the upper end a subsidiary globe bulged forward bubble-like; its triangleof three staring, fishy eyes, its foot-long and evidently flexible proboscis, and a distendedlateral system analogous to gills, suggesting that it was a head. Most of the body was coveredwith what at first appeared to be fur, but which on closer examination proved to be a densegrowth of dark, slender tentacles or sucking filaments, each tipped with a mouth suggestingthe head of an asp. On the head and below the proboscis the tentacles tended to be longer andthicker, and marked with spiral stripes—suggesting the traditional serpent-locks of Medusa.To say that such a thing could have an expression seems paradoxical; yet Jones felt thatthat triangle of bulging fish-eyes and that obliquely poised proboscis all bespoke a blend ofhate, greed, and sheer cruelty incomprehensible to mankind because mixed with other emotionsnot of the world or this solar system. Into this bestial abnormality, he reflected, Rogers musthave poured at once all his malignant insanity and all his uncanny sculptural genius. The thingwas incredible—and yet the photograph proved that it existed.
Rogers interrupted his reveries.
“Well—what do you think of It? Now do you wonder what crushed thedog and sucked it dry with a million mouths? It needed nourishment—and It will need more.It is a god, and I am the first priest of Its latter-day hierarchy. Iä! Shub-Niggurath!The Goat with a Thousand Young!”
Jones lowered the photograph in disgust and pity.
“See here, Rogers, this won’t do. There are limits, you know. It’sa great piece of work, and all that, but it isn’t good for you. Better not see it any more—letOrabona break it up, and try to forget about it. And let me tear this beastly picture up, too.”
With a snarl, Rogers snatched the photograph and returned it to the desk.
“Idiot—you—and you still think It’s all a fraud! You stillthink I made It, and you still think my figures are nothing but lifeless wax! Why, damn you,you’re a worse clod than a wax image yourself! But I’ve got proof this time, and you’regoing to know! Not just now, for It is resting after the sacrifice—but later. Oh, yes—youwill not doubt the power of It then.”
As Rogers glanced toward the padlocked inner door Jones retrieved his hat andstick from a nearby bench.
“Very well, Rogers, let it be later. I must be going now, but I’llcall around tomorrow afternoon. Think my advice over and see if it doesn’t sound sensible.Ask Orabona what he thinks, too.”
Rogers actually bared his teeth in wild-beast fashion.
“Must be going now, eh? Afraid, after all! Afraid, for all your bold talk!You say the effigies are only wax, and yet you run away when I begin to prove that they aren’t.You’re like the fellows who take my standing bet that they daren’t spend the nightin the museum—they come boldly enough, but after an hour they shriek and hammer to getout! Want me to ask Orabona, eh? You two—always against me! You want to break down thecoming earthly reign of It!”
Jones preserved his calm.
“No, Rogers—there’s nobody against you. And I’m not afraidof your figures, either, much as I admire your skill. But we’re both a bit nervous tonight,and I fancy some rest will do us good.”
Again Rogers checked his guest’s departure.
“Not afraid, eh?—then why are you so anxious to go? Look here—doyou or don’t you dare to stay alone here in the dark? What’s your hurry if you don’tbelieve in It?”
Some new idea seemed to have struck Rogers, and Jones eyed him closely.
“Why, I’ve no special hurry—but what would be gained by my stayinghere alone? What would it prove? My only objection is that it isn’t very comfortable forsleeping. What good would it do either of us?”
This time it was Jones who was struck with an idea. He continued in a toneof conciliation.
“See here, Rogers—I’ve just asked you what it would prove ifI stayed, when we both know. It would prove that your effigies are just effigies, and that yououghtn’t to let your imagination go the way it’s been going lately. Suppose I dostay. If I stick it out till morning, will you agree to take a new view of things—go ona vacation for three months or so and let Orabona destroy that new thing of yours? Come, now—isn’tthat fair?”
The expression on the showman’s face was hard to read. It was obviousthat he was thinking quickly, and that of sundry conflicting emotions, malign triumph was gettingthe upper hand. His voice held a choking quality as he replied.
“Fair enough! If you do stick it out, I’ll take your advice.But stick you must. We’ll go out for dinner and come back. I’ll lock you in the displayroom and go home. In the morning I’ll come down ahead of Orabona—he comes half anhour before the rest—and see how you are. But don’t try it unless you are verysure of your scepticism. Others have backed out—you have that chance. And I suppose a poundingon the outer door would always bring a constable. You may not like it so well after a while—you’llbe in the same building, though not in the same room with It.”
As they left the rear door into the dingy courtyard, Rogers took with him thepiece of burlap—weighted with a gruesome burden. Near the centre of the court was a manhole,whose cover the showman lifted quietly, and with a shuddersome suggestion of familiarity. Burlapand all, the burden went down to the oblivion of a cloacal labyrinth. Jones shuddered, and almostshrank from the gaunt figure at his side as they emerged into the street.
By unspoken mutual consent, they did not dine together, but agreed to meetin front of the museum at eleven.
Jones hailed a cab, and breathed more freely when he had crossed Waterloo Bridgeand was approaching the brilliantly lighted Strand. He dined at a quiet café, and subsequentlywent to his home in Portland Place to bathe and get a few things. Idly he wondered what Rogerswas doing. He had heard that the man had a vast, dismal house in the Walworth Road, full ofobscure and forbidden books, occult paraphernalia, and wax images which he did not choose toplace on exhibition. Orabona, he understood, lived in separate quarters in the same house.
At eleven Jones found Rogers waiting by the basement door in Southwark Street.Their words were few, but each seemed taut with a menacing tension. They agreed that the vaultedexhibition room alone should form the scene of the vigil, and Rogers did not insist that thewatcher sit in the special adult alcove of supreme horrors. The showman, having extinguishedall the lights with switches in the workroom, locked the door of that crypt with one of thekeys on his crowded ring. Without shaking hands he passed out the street door, locked it afterhim, and stamped up the worn steps to the sidewalk outside. As his tread receded, Jones realisedthat the long, tedious vigil had commenced.

II.

Later, in the utter blackness of the great arched cellar, Jones cursed thechildish naiveté which had brought him there. For the first half-hour he had kept flashingon his pocket-light at intervals, but now just sitting in the dark on one of the visitors’benches had become a more nerve-racking thing. Every time the beam shot out it lighted up somemorbid, grotesque object—a guillotine, a nameless hybrid monster, a pasty-bearded facecrafty with evil, a body with red torrents streaming from a severed throat. Jones knew thatno sinister reality was attached to these things, but after that first half-hour he preferrednot to see them.
Why he had bothered to humour that madman he could scarcely imagine. It wouldhave been much simpler merely to have let him alone, or to have called in a mental specialist.Probably, he reflected, it was the fellow-feeling of one artist for another. There was so muchgenius in Rogers that he deserved every possible chance to be helped quietly out of his growingmania. Any man who could imagine and construct the incredibly life-like things that he had producedwas surely not far from actual greatness. He had the fancy of a Sime or a Doré joinedto the minute, scientific craftsmanship of a Blatschka. Indeed, he had done for the world ofnightmare what the Blatschkas with their marvellously accurate plant models of finely wroughtand coloured glass had done for the world of botany.
At midnight the strokes of a distant clock filtered through the darkness, andJones felt cheered by the message from a still-surviving outside world. The vaulted museum chamberwas like a tomb—ghastly in its utter solitude. Even a mouse would be cheering company;yet Rogers had once boasted that—for “certain reasons”, as he said—no miceor even insects ever came near the place. That was very curious, yet it seemed to be true. Thedeadness and silence were virtually complete. If only something would make a sound! He shuffledhis feet, and the echoes came spectrally out of the absolute stillness. He coughed, but therewas something mocking in the staccato reverberations. He could not, he vowed, begin talkingto himself. That meant nervous disintegration. Time seemed to pass with abnormal and disconcertingslowness. He could have sworn that hours had elapsed since he last flashed the light on hiswatch, yet here was only the stroke of midnight.
He wished that his senses were not so preternaturally keen. Something in thedarkness and stillness seemed to have sharpened them, so that they responded to faint intimationshardly strong enough to be called true impressions. His ears seemed at times to catch a faint,elusive susurrus which could not quite be identified with the nocturnal hum of the squalidstreets outside, and he thought of vague, irrelevant things like the music of the spheres andthe unknown, inaccessible life of alien dimensions pressing on our own. Rogers often speculatedabout such things.
The floating specks of light in his blackness-drowned eyes seemed inclinedto take on curious symmetries of pattern and motion. He had often wondered about those strangerays from the unplumbed abyss which scintillate before us in the absence of all earthly illumination,but he had never known any that behaved just as these were behaving. They lacked the restfulaimlessness of ordinary light-specks—suggesting some will and purpose remote from any terrestrialconception.
Then there was that suggestion of odd stirrings. Nothing was open, yet in spiteof the general draughtlessness Jones felt that the air was not uniformly quiet. There were intangiblevariations in pressure—not quite decided enough to suggest the loathsome pawings of unseenelementals. It was abnormally chilly, too. He did not like any of this. The air tasted salty,as if it were mixed with the brine of dark subterrene waters, and there was a bare hint of someodour of ineffable mustiness. In the daytime he had never noticed that the waxen figures hadan odour. Even now that half-received hint was not the way wax figures ought to smell. It wasmore like the faint smell of specimens in a natural-history museum. Curious, in view of Rogers’claims that his figures were not all artificial—indeed, it was probably that claim whichmade one’s imagination conjure up the olfactory suspicion. One must guard against excessesof the imagination—had not such things driven poor Rogers mad?
But the utter loneliness of this place was frightful. Even the distant chimesseemed to come from across cosmic gulfs. It made Jones think of that insane picture which Rogershad shewed him—the wildly carved chamber with the cryptic throne which the fellow had claimedwas part of a three-million-year-old ruin in the shunned and inaccessible solitudes of the Arctic.Perhaps Rogers had been to Alaska, but that picture was certainly nothing but stage scenery.It couldn’t normally be otherwise, with all that carving and those terrible symbols. Andthat monstrous shape supposed to have been found on that throne—what a flight of diseasedfancy! Jones wondered just how far he actually was from the insane masterpiece in wax—probablyit was kept behind that heavy, padlocked plank door leading somewhere out of the workroom. Butit would never do to brood about a waxen image. Was not the present room full of such things,some of them scarcely less horrible than the dreadful “IT”? And beyond a thin canvasscreen on the left was the “Adults only” alcove with its nameless phantoms of delirium.
The proximity of the numberless waxen shapes began to get on Jones’s nervesmore and more as the quarter-hours wore on. He knew the museum so well that he could not getrid of their usual images even in the total darkness. Indeed, the darkness had the effect ofadding to the remembered images certain very disturbing imaginative overtones. The guillotineseemed to creak, and the bearded face of Landru—slayer of his fifty wives—twisteditself into expressions of monstrous menace. From the severed throat of Madame Demers a hideousbubbling sound seemed to emanate, while the headless, legless victim of a trunk murder triedto edge closer and closer on its gory stumps. Jones began shutting his eyes to see if that woulddim the images, but found it was useless. Besides, when he shut his eyes the strange, purposefulpatterns of light-specks became more disturbingly pronounced.
Then suddenly he began trying to keep the hideous images he had formerly beentrying to banish. He tried to keep them because they were giving place to still more hideousones. In spite of himself his memory began reconstructing the utterly non-human blasphemiesthat lurked in the obscurer corners, and these lumpish hybrid growths oozed and wriggled towardhim as though hunting him down in a circle. Black Tsathoggua moulded itself from a toad-likegargoyle to a long, sinuous line with hundreds of rudimentary feet, and a lean, rubbery night-gauntspread its wings as if to advance and smother the watcher. Jones braced himself to keep fromscreaming. He knew he was reverting to the traditional terrors of his childhood, and resolvedto use his adult reason to keep the phantoms at bay. It helped a bit, he found, to flash thelight again. Frightful as were the images it shewed, these were not as bad as what his fancycalled out of the utter blackness.
But there were drawbacks. Even in the light of his torch he could not helpsuspecting a slight, furtive trembling on the part of the canvas partition screening off theterrible “Adults only” alcove. He knew what lay beyond, and shivered. Imaginationcalled up the shocking form of fabulous Yog-Sothoth—only a congeries of iridescent globes,yet stupendous in its malign suggestiveness. What was this accursed mass slowly floating towardhim and bumping on the partition that stood in the way? A small bulge in the canvas far to theright suggested the sharp horn of Gnoph-keh, the hairy myth-thing of the Greenland ice, thatwalked sometimes on two legs, sometimes on four, and sometimes on six. To get this stuff outof his head Jones walked boldly toward the hellish alcove with torch burning steadily. Of course,none of his fears was true. Yet were not the long, facial tentacles of great Cthulhu actuallyswaying, slowly and insidiously? He knew they were flexible, but he had not realised that thedraught caused by his advance was enough to set them in motion.
Returning to his former seat outside the alcove, he shut his eyes and let thesymmetrical light-specks do their worst. The distant clock boomed a single stroke. Could itbe only one? He flashed the light on his watch and saw that it was precisely that hour. It wouldbe hard indeed waiting for morning. Rogers would be down at about eight o’clock, aheadof even Orabona. It would be light outside in the main basement long before that, but none ofit could penetrate here. All the windows in this basement had been bricked up but the threesmall ones facing the court. A pretty bad wait, all told.
His ears were getting most of the hallucinations now—for he could swearhe heard stealthy, plodding footsteps in the workroom beyond the closed and locked door. Hehad no business thinking of that unexhibited horror which Rogers called “It”. Thething was a contamination—it had driven its maker mad, and now even its picture was callingup imaginative terrors. It could not be in the workroom—it was very obviously beyond thatpadlocked door of heavy planking. Those steps were certainly pure imagination.
Then he thought he heard the key turn in the workroom door. Flashing on historch, he saw nothing but the ancient six-panelled portal in its proper position. Again he trieddarkness and closed eyes, but there followed a harrowing illusion of creaking—not the guillotinethis time, but the slow, furtive opening of the workroom door. He would not scream. Once hescreamed, he would be lost. There was a sort of padding or shuffling audible now, and it wasslowly advancing toward him. He must retain command of himself. Had he not done so when thenameless brain-shapes tried to close in on him? The shuffling crept nearer, and his resolutionfailed. He did not scream but merely gulped out a challenge.
“Who goes there? Who are you? What do you want?”
There was no answer, but the shuffling kept on. Jones did not know which hefeared most to do—turn on his flashlight or stay in the dark while the thing crept uponhim. This thing was different, he felt profoundly, from the other terrors of the evening. Hisfingers and throat worked spasmodically. Silence was impossible, and the suspense of utter blacknesswas beginning to be the most intolerable of all conditions. Again he cried out hysterically—“Halt!Who goes there?”—as he switched on the revealing beams of his torch. Then, paralysedby what he saw, he dropped the flashlight and screamed—not once but many times.
Shuffling toward him in the darkness was the gigantic, blasphemous form ofa black thing not wholly ape and not wholly insect. Its hide hung loosely upon its frame, andits rugose, dead-eyed rudiment of a head swayed drunkenly from side to side. Its fore paws wereextended, with talons spread wide, and its whole body was taut with murderous malignity despiteits utter lack of facial expression. After the screams and the final coming of darkness it leaped,and in a moment had Jones pinned to the floor. There was no struggle, for the watcher had fainted.
Jones’s fainting spell could not have lasted more than a moment, for thenameless thing was apishly dragging him through the darkness when he began recovering consciousness.What started him fully awake were the sounds which the thing was making—or rather, thevoice with which it was making them. That voice was human, and it was familiar. Only one livingbeing could be behind the hoarse, feverish accents which were chanting to an unknown horror.
“Iä! Iä!” it was howling. “I am coming, O Rhan-Tegoth,coming with the nourishment. You have waited long and fed ill, but now you shall have what waspromised. That and more, for instead of Orabona it will be one of high degree who had doubtedyou. You shall crush and drain him, with all his doubts, and grow strong thereby. And ever afteramong men he shall be shewn as a monument to your glory. Rhan-Tegoth, infinite and invincible,I am your slave and high-priest. You are hungry, and I provide. I read the sign and have ledyou forth. I shall feed you with blood, and you shall feed me with power. Iä! Shub-Niggurath!The Goat with a Thousand Young!”
In an instant all the terrors of the night dropped from Jones like a discardedcloak. He was again master of his mind, for he knew the very earthly and material peril he hadto deal with. This was no monster of fable, but a dangerous madman. It was Rogers, dressed insome nightmare covering of his own insane designing, and about to make a frightful sacrificeto the devil-god he had fashioned out of wax. Clearly, he must have entered the workroom fromthe rear courtyard, donned his disguise, and then advanced to seize his neatly trapped and fear-brokenvictim. His strength was prodigious, and if he was to be thwarted, one must act quickly. Countingon the madman’s confidence in his unconsciousness he determined to take him by surprise,while his grasp was relatively lax. The feel of a threshold told him he was crossing into thepitch-black workroom.
With the strength of mortal fear Jones made a sudden spring from the half-recumbentposture in which he was being dragged. For an instant he was free of the astonished maniac’shands, and in another instant a lucky lunge in the dark had put his own hands at his captor’sweirdly concealed throat. Simultaneously Rogers gripped him again, and without further preliminariesthe two were locked in a desperate struggle of life and death. Jones’s athletic training,without doubt, was his sole salvation; for his mad assailant, freed from every inhibition offair play, decency, or even self-preservation, was an engine of savage destruction as formidableas a wolf or panther.
Guttural cries sometimes punctured the hideous tussle in the dark. Blood spurted,clothing ripped, and Jones at last felt the actual throat of the maniac, shorn of its spectralmask. He spoke not a word, but put every ounce of energy into the defence of his life. Rogerskicked, gouged, butted, bit, clawed, and spat—yet found strength to yelp out actual sentencesat times. Most of his speech was in a ritualistic jargon full of references to “It”or “Rhan-Tegoth”, and to Jones’s overwrought nerves it seemed as if the criesechoed from an infinite distance of daemoniac snortings and bayings. Toward the last they wererolling on the floor, overturning benches or striking against the walls and the brick foundationsof the central melting-furnace. Up to the very end Jones could not be certain of saving himself,but chance finally intervened in his favour. A jab of his knee against Rogers’ chest produceda general relaxation, and a moment later he knew he had won.
Though hardly able to hold himself up, Jones rose and stumbled about the wallsseeking the light-switch—for his flashlight was gone, together with most of his clothing.As he lurched along he dragged his limp opponent with him, fearing a sudden attack when themadman came to. Finding the switch-box, he fumbled till he had the right handle. Then, as thewildly disordered workroom burst into sudden radiance, he set about binding Rogers with suchcords and belts as he could easily find. The fellow’s disguise—or what was left ofit—seemed to be made of a puzzlingly queer sort of leather. For some reason it made Jones’sflesh crawl to touch it, and there seemed to be an alien, rusty odour about it. In the normalclothes beneath it was Rogers’ key-ring, and this the exhausted victor seized as his finalpassport to freedom. The shades at the small, slit-like windows were all securely drawn, andhe let them remain so.
Washing off the blood of battle at a convenient sink, Jones donned the mostordinary-looking and least ill-fitting clothes he could find on the costume hooks. Testing thedoor to the courtyard, he found it fastened with a spring-lock which did not require a key fromthe inside. He kept the key-ring, however, to admit him on his return with aid—for plainly,the thing to do was to call in an alienist. There was no telephone in the museum, but it wouldnot take long to find an all-night restaurant or chemist’s shop where one could be had.He had almost opened the door to go when a torrent of hideous abuse from across the room toldhim that Rogers—whose visible injuries were confined to a long, deep scratch down the leftcheek—had regained consciousness.
“Fool! Spawn of Noth-Yidik and effluvium of K’thun! Son of the dogsthat howl in the maelstrom of Azathoth! You would have been sacred and immortal, and now youare betraying It and Its priest! Beware—for It is hungry! It would have been Orabona—thatdamned treacherous dog ready to turn against me and It—but I give you the first honourinstead. Now you must both beware, for It is not gentle without Its priest.
“Iä! Iä! Vengeance is at hand! Do you know you would have beenimmortal? Look at the furnace! There is a fire ready to light, and there is wax in the kettle.I would have done with you as I have done with other once-living forms. Hei! You, who have vowedall my effigies are waxen, would have become a waxen effigy yourself! The furnace was all ready!When It had had Its fill, and you were like that dog I shewed you, I would have made your flattened,punctured fragments immortal! Wax would have done it. Haven’t you said I’m a greatartist? Wax in every pore—wax over every square inch of you—Iä! Iä! Andever after the world would have looked at your mangled carcass and wondered how I ever imaginedand made such a thing! Hei! And Orabona would have come next, and others after him—andthus would my waxen family have grown!
“Dog—do you still think I made all my effigies? Why not saypreserved? You know by this time the strange places I’ve been to, and the strangethings I’ve brought back. Coward—you could never face the dimensional shambler whosehide I put on to scare you—the mere sight of it alive, or even the full-fledged thoughtof it, would kill you instantly with fright! Iä! Iä! It waits hungry for the bloodthat is the life!”
Rogers, propped against the wall, swayed to and fro in his bonds.
“See here, Jones—if I let you go will you let me go? It must be takencare of by Its high-priest. Orabona will be enough to keep It alive—and when he is finishedI will make his fragments immortal in wax for the world to see. It could have been you, butyou have rejected the honour. I won’t bother you again. Let me go, and I will share withyou the power that It will bring me. Iä! Iä! Great is Rhan-Tegoth! Let me go! Letme go! It is starving down there beyond that door, and if It dies the Old Ones can never comeback. Hei! Hei! Let me go!”
Jones merely shook his head, though the hideousness of the showman’s imaginingsrevolted him. Rogers, now staring wildly at the padlocked plank door, thumped his head againand again against the brick wall and kicked with his tightly bound ankles. Jones was afraidhe would injure himself, and advanced to bind him more firmly to some stationary object. Writhing,Rogers edged away from him and set up a series of frenetic ululations whose utter, monstrousunhumanness was appalling, and whose sheer volume was almost incredible. It seemed impossiblethat any human throat could produce noises so loud and piercing, and Jones felt that if thiscontinued there would be no need to telephone for aid. It could not be long before a constablewould investigate, even granting that there were no listening neighbours in this deserted warehousedistrict.
“Wza-y’ei! Wza-y’ei!” howled the madman. “Y’kaahaa bho—ii, Rhan-Tegoth—Cthulhu fhtagn—Ei! Ei! Ei! Ei!—Rhan-Tegoth, Rhan-Tegoth,Rhan-Tegoth!”
The tautly trussed creature, who had started squirming his way across the litteredfloor, now reached the padlocked plank door and commenced knocking his head thunderously againstit. Jones dreaded the task of binding him further, and wished he were not so exhausted fromthe previous struggle. This violent aftermath was getting hideously on his nerves, and he beganto feel a return of the nameless qualms he had felt in the dark. Everything about Rogers andhis museum was so hellishly morbid and suggestive of black vistas beyond life! It was loathsometo think of the waxen masterpiece of abnormal genius which must at this very moment be lurkingclose at hand in the blackness beyond the heavy, padlocked door.
And now something happened which sent an additional chill down Jones’sspine, and caused every hair—even the tiny growth on the backs of his hands—to bristlewith a vague fright beyond classification. Rogers had suddenly stopped screaming and beatinghis head against the stout plank door, and was straining up to a sitting posture, head cockedon one side as if listening intently for something. All at once a smile of devilish triumphoverspread his face, and he began speaking intelligibly again—this time in a hoarse whispercontrasting oddly with his former stentorian howling.
“Listen, fool! Listen hard! It has heard me, and is coming. Can’tyou hear It splashing out of Its tank down there at the end of the runway? I dug it deep, becausethere was nothing too good for It. It is amphibious, you know—you saw the gills in thepicture. It came to the earth from lead-grey Yuggoth, where the cities are under the warm deepsea. It can’t stand up in there—too tall—has to sit or crouch. Let me get mykeys—we must let It out and kneel down before It. Then we will go out and find a dog orcat—or perhaps a drunken man—to give It the nourishment It needs.”
It was not what the madman said, but the way he said it, that disorganisedJones so badly. The utter, insane confidence and sincerity in that crazed whisper were damnablycontagious. Imagination, with such a stimulus, could find an active menace in the devilish waxfigure that lurked unseen just beyond the heavy planking. Eyeing the door in unholy fascination,Jones noticed that it bore several distinct cracks, though no marks of violent treatment werevisible on this side. He wondered how large a room or closet lay behind it, and how the waxenfigure was arranged. The maniac’s idea of a tank and runway was as clever as all his otherimaginings.
Then, in one terrible instant, Jones completely lost the power to draw a breath.The leather belt he had seized for Rogers’ further strapping fell from his limp hands,and a spasm of shivering convulsed him from head to foot. He might have known the place woulddrive him mad as it had driven Rogers—and now he was mad. He was mad, for he nowharboured hallucinations more weird than any which had assailed him earlier that night. Themadman was bidding him hear the splashing of a mythical monster in a tank beyond the door—andnow, God help him, he did hear it!
Rogers saw the spasm of horror reach Jones’s face and transform it toa staring mask of fear. He cackled.
“At last, fool, you believe! At last you know! You hear It and It comes!Get me my keys, fool—we must do homage and serve It!”
But Jones was past paying attention to any human words, mad or sane. Phobicparalysis held him immobile and half-conscious, with wild images racing phantasmagorically throughhis helpless imagination. There was a splashing. There was a padding or shuffling,as of great wet paws on a solid surface. Something was approaching. Into his nostrils,from the cracks in that nightmare plank door, poured a noisome animal stench like and yet unlikethat of the mammal cages at the zoölogical gardens in Regent’s Park.
He did not know now whether Rogers was talking or not. Everything real hadfaded away, and he was a statue obsessed with dreams and hallucinations so unnatural that theybecame almost objective and remote from him. He thought he heard a sniffing or snorting fromthe unknown gulf beyond the door, and when a sudden baying, trumpeting noise assailed his earshe could not feel sure that it came from the tightly bound maniac whose image swam uncertainlyin his shaken vision. The photograph of that accursed, unseen wax thing persisted in floatingthrough his consciousness. Such a thing had no right to exist. Had it not driven him mad?
Even as he reflected, a fresh evidence of madness beset him. Something, hethought, was fumbling with the latch of the heavy padlocked door. It was patting and pawingand pushing at the planks. There was a thudding on the stout wood, which grew louder and louder.The stench was horrible. And now the assault on that door from the inside was a malign, determinedpounding like the strokes of a battering-ram. There was an ominous cracking—a splintering—awelling foetor—a falling plank—a black paw ending in a crab-like claw.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
“Help! Help! God help me!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Aaaaaaa!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
With intense effort Jones is today able to recall a sudden bursting of hisfear-paralysis into the liberation of frenzied automatic flight. What he evidently did musthave paralleled curiously the wild, plunging flights of maddest nightmares; for he seems tohave leaped across the disordered crypt at almost a single bound, yanked open the outside door,which closed and locked itself after him with a clatter, sprung up the worn stone steps threeat a time, and raced frantically and aimlessly out of that dank cobblestoned court and throughthe squalid streets of Southwark.
Here the memory ends. Jones does not know how he got home, and there is noevidence of his having hired a cab. Probably he raced all the way by blind instinct—overWaterloo Bridge, along the Strand and Charing Cross, and up Haymarket and Regent Street to hisown neighbourhood. He still had on the queer mélange of museum costumes when he grewconscious enough to call the doctor.
A week later the nerve specialists allowed him to leave his bed and walk inthe open air.
But he had not told the specialists much. Over his whole experience hung apall of madness and nightmare, and he felt that silence was the only course. When he was up,he scanned intently all the papers which had accumulated since that hideous night, but foundno reference to anything queer at the museum. How much, after all, had been reality? Where didreality end and morbid dream begin? Had his mind gone wholly to pieces in that dark exhibitionchamber, and had the whole fight with Rogers been a phantasm of fever? It would help to puthim on his feet if he could settle some of these maddening points. He must have seenthat damnable photograph of the wax image called “It”, for no brain but Rogers’could ever have conceived such a blasphemy.
It was a fortnight before he dared to enter Southwark Street again. He wentin the middle of the morning, when there was the greatest amount of sane, wholesome activityaround the ancient, crumbling shops and warehouses. The museum’s sign was still there,and as he approached he saw that the place was open. The gateman nodded in a pleasant recognitionas he summoned up the courage to enter, and in the vaulted chamber below an attendant touchedhis cap cheerfully. Perhaps everything had been a dream. Would he dare to knock at the doorof the workroom and look for Rogers?
Then Orabona advanced to greet him. His dark, sleek face was a trifle sardonic,but Jones felt that he was not unfriendly. He spoke with a trace of accent.
“Good morning, Mr. Jones. It is some time since we have seen you here.Did you wish Mr. Rogers? I’m sorry, but he is away. He had word of business in America,and had to go. Yes, it was very sudden. I am in charge now—here, and at the house. I tryto maintain Mr. Rogers’ high standard—till he is back.”
The foreigner smiled—perhaps from affability alone. Jones scarcely knewhow to reply, but managed to mumble out a few inquiries about the day after his last visit.Orabona seemed greatly amused by the questions, and took considerable care in framing his replies.
“Oh, yes, Mr. Jones—the twenty-eighth of last month. I remember itfor many reasons. In the morning—before Mr. Rogers got here, you understand—I foundthe workroom in quite a mess. There was a great deal of—cleaning up—to do. There hadbeen—late work, you see. Important new specimen given its secondary baking process. I tookcomplete charge when I came.
“It was a hard specimen to prepare—but of course Mr. Rogers has taughtme a great deal. He is, as you know, a very great artist. When he came he helped me completethe specimen—helped very materially, I assure you—but he left soon without even greetingthe men. As I tell you, he was called away suddenly. There were important chemical reactionsinvolved. They made loud noises—in fact, some teamsters in the court outside fancy theyheard several pistol shots—very amusing idea!
“As for the new specimen—that matter is very unfortunate. It is agreat masterpiece—designed and made, you understand, by Mr. Rogers. He will see about itwhen he gets back.”
Again Orabona smiled.
“The police, you know. We put it on display a week ago, and there weretwo or three faintings. One poor fellow had an epileptic fit in front of it. You see, it isa trifle—stronger—than the rest. Larger, for one thing. Of course, it was in the adultalcove. The next day a couple of men from Scotland Yard looked it over and said it was too morbidto be shewn. Said we’d have to remove it. It was a tremendous shame—such a masterpieceof art—but I didn’t feel justified in appealing to the courts in Mr. Rogers’absence. He would not like so much publicity with the police now—but when he gets back—whenhe gets back—“
For some reason or other Jones felt a mounting tide of uneasiness and repulsion.But Orabona was continuing.
“You are a connoisseur, Mr. Jones. I am sure I violate no law in offeringyou a private view. It may be—subject, of course, to Mr. Rogers’ wishes—thatwe shall destroy the specimen some day—but that would be a crime.”
Jones had a powerful impulse to refuse the sight and flee precipitately, butOrabona was leading him forward by the arm with an artist’s enthusiasm. The adult alcove,crowded with nameless horrors, held no visitors. In the farther corner a large niche had beencurtained off, and to this the smiling assistant advanced.
“You must know, Mr. Jones, that the title of this specimen is ‘TheSacrifice to Rhan-Tegoth’.”
Jones started violently, but Orabona appeared not to notice.
“The shapeless, colossal god is a feature in certain obscure legends whichMr. Rogers has studied. All nonsense, of course, as you’ve so often assured Mr. Rogers.It is supposed to have come from outer space, and to have lived in the Arctic three millionyears ago. It treated its sacrifices rather peculiarly and horribly, as you shall see. Mr. Rogershad made it fiendishly life-like—even to the face of the victim.”
Now trembling violently, Jones clung to the brass railing in front of the curtainedniche. He almost reached out to stop Orabona when he saw the curtain beginning to swing aside,but some conflicting impulse held him back. The foreigner smiled triumphantly.
“Behold!”
Jones reeled in spite of his grip on the railing.
“God!—great God!”
Fully ten feet high despite a shambling, crouching attitude expressive of infinitecosmic malignancy, a monstrosity of unbelievable horror was shewn starting forward from a Cyclopeanivory throne covered with grotesque carvings. In the central pair of its six legs it bore acrushed, flattened, distorted, bloodless thing, riddled with a million punctures, and in placesseared as with some pungent acid. Only the mangled head of the victim, lolling upside down atone side, revealed that it represented something once human.
The monster itself needed no title for one who had seen a certain hellish photograph.That damnable print had been all too faithful; yet it could not carry the full horror whichlay in the gigantic actuality. The globular torso—the bubble-like suggestion of a head—thethree fishy eyes—the foot-long proboscis—the bulging gills—the monstrous capillationof asp-like suckers—the six sinuous limbs with their black paws and crab-like claws—God!the familiarity of that black paw ending in a crab-like claw!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Orabona’s smile was utterly damnable. Jones choked, and stared at thehideous exhibit with a mounting fascination which perplexed and disturbed him. What half-revealedhorror was holding and forcing him to look longer and search out details? This had driven Rogersmad&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Rogers, supreme artist&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. said they weren’tartificial.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Then he localised the thing that held him. It was the crushed waxen victim’slolling head, and something that it implied. This head was not entirely devoid of a face, andthat face was familiar. It was like the mad face of poor Rogers. Jones peered closer, hardlyknowing why he was driven to do so. Wasn’t it natural for a mad egotist to mould his ownfeatures into his masterpiece? Was there anything more that subconscious vision had seized onand suppressed in sheer terror?
The wax of the mangled face had been handled with boundless dexterity. Thosepunctures—how perfectly they reproduced the myriad wounds somehow inflicted on that poordog! But there was something more. On the left cheek one could trace an irregularity which seemedoutside the general scheme—as if the sculptor had sought to cover up a defect of his firstmodelling. The more Jones looked at it, the more mysteriously it horrified him—and then,suddenly, he remembered a circumstance which brought his horror to a head. That night of hideousness—thetussle—the bound madman—and the long, deep scratch down the left cheek of the actualliving Rogers.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Jones, releasing his desperate clutch on the railing, sank in a total faint.
Orabona continued to smile.
