It is midnight. Before dawn they will find me and take me to a black cell where I shall languishinterminably, while insatiable desires gnaw at my vitals and wither up my heart, till at lastI become one with the dead that I love.
My seat is the foetid hollow of an aged grave; my desk is the back of a fallentombstone worn smooth by devastating centuries; my only light is that of the stars and a thin-edgedmoon, yet I can see as clearly as though it were mid-day. Around me on every side, sepulchralsentinels guarding unkempt graves, the tilting, decrepit headstones lie half-hidden in massesof nauseous, rotting vegetation. Above the rest, silhouetted against the livid sky, an augustmonument lifts its austere, tapering spire like the spectral chieftain of a lemurian horde.The air is heavy with the noxious odors of fungi and the scent of damp, mouldy earth, but tome it is the aroma of Elysium. It is still—terrifyingly still—with a silence whosevery profundity bespeaks the solemn and the hideous. Could I choose my habitation it would bein the heart of some such city of putrefying flesh and crumbling bones; for their nearness sendsecstatic thrills through my soul, causing the stagnant blood to race through my veins and mytorpid heart to pound with delirious joy—for the presence of death is life to me!
My early childhood was one long, prosaic, and monotonous apathy. Strictly ascetic,wan, pallid, undersized, and subject to protracted spells of morbid moroseness, I was ostracizedby the healthy normal youngsters of my own age. They dubbed me a spoil-sport, an “old woman”,because I had no interest in the rough, childish games they played, or any stamina to participatein them, had I so desired.
Like all rural villages, Fenham had its quota of poison-tongued gossips. Theirprying imaginations hailed my lethargic temperament as some abhorrent abnormality; they comparedme with my parents and shook their heads in ominous doubt at the vast difference. Some of themore superstitious openly pronounced me a changeling, while others who knew something of myancestry called attention to the vague mysterious rumors concerning a great-great-grand unclewho had been burned at the stake as a necromancer.
Had I lived in some larger town, with greater opportunities for congenial companionship,perhaps I could have overcome this early tendency to be a recluse. As I reached my teens I greweven more sullen, morbid, and apathetic. My life lacked motivation. I seemed in the grip ofsomething that dulled my senses, stunted my development, retarded my activities, and left meunaccountably dissatisfied.
I was sixteen when I attended my first funeral. A funeral in Fenham was a pre-eminentsocial event, for our town was noted for the longevity of its inhabitants. When, moreover, thefuneral was that of such a well-known character as my grandfather, it was safe to assume thatthe townspeople would turn out en masse to pay due homage to his memory. Yet I did not viewthe approaching ceremony with even latent interest. Anything that tended to lift me out of myhabitual inertia held for me only the promise of physical and mental disquietude. In deferenceto my parents’ importunings, mainly to give myself relief from their caustic condemnationsof what they chose to call my unfilial attitude, I agreed to accompany them.
There was nothing out of the ordinary about my grandfather’s funeral unlessit was the voluminous array of floral tributes; but this, remember, was my initiation to thesolemn rites of such an occasion. Something about the darkened room, the oblong coffin withits somber drapings, the banked masses of fragrant blooms, the dolorous manifestations of theassembled villagers, stirred me from my normal listlessness and arrested my attention. Rousedfrom my momentary reverie by a nudge from my mother’s sharp elbow, I followed her acrossthe room to the casket where the body of my grandparent lay.
For the first time I was face to face with Death. I looked down upon the calmplacid face lined with its multitudinous wrinkles, and saw nothing to cause so much of sorrow.Instead, it seemed to me that grandfather was immeasurably content, blandly satisfied. I feltswayed by some strange discordant sense of elation. So slowly, so stealthily had it crept overme, that I could scarcely define its coming. As I mentally review that portentous hour it seemsthat it must have originated with my first glimpse of that funeral scene, silently strengtheningits grip with subtle insidiousness. A baleful malignant influence that seemed to emanate fromthe corpse itself held me with magnetic fascination. My whole being seemed charged with someecstatic electrifying force, and I felt my form straighten without conscious volition. My eyeswere trying to burn beneath the closed lids of the dead man’s and read some secret messagethey concealed. My heart gave a sudden leap of unholy glee, and pounded against my ribs withdemoniacal force as if to free itself from the confining walls of my frail frame. Wild, wanton,soul-satisfying sensuality engulfed me. Once more the vigorous prod of a maternal elbow jarredme into activity. I had made my way to the sable-shrouded coffin with leaden tread; I walkedaway with new-found animation.
I accompanied the cortege to the cemetery, my whole physical being permeatedwith this mystic enlivening influence. It was as if I had quaffed deep draughts of some exoticelixir—some abominable concoction brewed from blasphemous formulae in the archives of Belial.
The townsfolk were so intent upon the ceremony that the radical change in mydemeanor passed unnoticed by all save my father and my mother; but in the fortnight that followed,the village busybodies found fresh material for their vitriolic tongues in my altered bearing.At the end of the fortnight, however, the potency of the stimulus began to lose its effectiveness.Another day or two and I had completely reverted to my old-time languor, though not to the completeand engulfing insipidity of the past. Before, there had been an utter lack of desire to emergefrom the enervation; now vague and indefinable unrest disturbed me. Outwardly I had become myselfagain, and the scandal-mongers turned to some more engrossing subject. Had they even so muchas dreamed the true cause of my exhilaration they would have shunned me as if I were a filthy,leprous thing. Had I visioned the execrable power behind my brief period of elation I wouldhave locked myself forever from the rest of the world and spent my remaining years in penitentsolitude.
Tragedy often runs in trilogies, hence despite the proverbial longevity ofour townspeople the next five years brought the death of both parents. My mother went first,in an accident of the most unexpected nature; and so genuine was my grief that I was honestlysurprised to find its poignancy mocked and contradicted by that almost forgotten feeling ofsupreme and diabolical ecstasy. Once more my heart leaped wildly within me, once more it poundedat trip-hammer speed and sent the hot blood coursing through my veins with meteoric fervor.I shook from my shoulders the harassing cloak of stagnation only to replace it with the infinitelymore horrible burden of loathsome, unhallowed desire. I haunted the death-chamber where thebody of my mother lay, my soul athirst for the devilish nectar that seemed to saturate the airof the darkened room. Every breath strengthened me, lifted me to towering heights of seraphicsatisfaction. I knew, now, that it was but a sort of drugged delirium which must soon pass andleave me correspondingly weakened by its malign power, yet I could no more control my longingthan I could untwist the Gordian knots in the already tangled skein of my destiny.
I knew, too, that through some strange Satanic curse my life depended uponthe dead for its motive force; that there was a singularity in my makeup which responded onlyto the awesome presence of some lifeless clod. A few days later, frantic for the bestial intoxicanton which the fullness of my existence depended, I interviewed Fenham’s sole undertakerand talked him into taking me on as a sort of apprentice.
The shock of my mother’s demise had visibly affected my father. I thinkthat if I had broached the idea of such outré employment at any other time he would havebeen emphatic in his refusal. As it was he nodded acquiescence after a moment’s sober thought.How little did I dream that he would be the object of my first practical lesson!
He, too, died suddenly; developing some hitherto unsuspected heart affliction.My octogenarian employer tried his best to dissuade me from the unthinkable task of embalminghis body, nor did he detect the rapturous glint in my eyes as I finally won him over to my damnablepoint of view. I cannot hope to express the reprehensible, the unutterable thoughts that sweptin tumultuous waves of passion through my racing heart as I labored over the lifeless clay.Unsurpassed love was the keynote of these concepts, a love greater—far greater—thanany I had ever borne him while he was alive.
My father was not a rich man, but he had possessed enough of worldly goodsto make him comfortably independent. As his sole heir I found myself in rather a paradoxicalposition. My early youth had totally failed to fit me for contact with the modern world, yetthe primitive life of Fenham with its attendant isolation palled upon me. Indeed, the longevityof the inhabitants defeated my sole motive in arranging my indenture.
After settling the estate it proved an easy matter to secure my release andI headed for Bayboro, a city some fifty miles away. Here my year of apprenticeship stood mein good stead. I had no trouble in establishing a favorable connection as an assistant withthe Gresham Corporation, a concern that maintained the largest funeral parlors in the city.I even prevailed upon them to let me sleep upon the premises—for already the proximityof the dead was becoming an obsession.
I applied myself to my task with unwonted zeal. No case was too gruesome formy impious sensibilities, and I soon became master at my chosen vocation. Every fresh corpsebrought into the establishment meant a fulfilled promise of ungodly gladness, of irreverentgratification; a return of that rapturous tumult of the arteries which transformed my grislytask into one of beloved devotion—yet every carnal satiation exacted its toll. I came todread the days that brought no dead for me to gloat over, and prayed to all the obscene godsof the nethermost abysses to bring swift, sure death upon the residents of the city.
Then came the nights when a skulking figure stole surreptitiously through theshadowy streets of the suburbs; pitch-dark nights when the midnight moon was obscured by heavylowering clouds. It was a furtive figure that blended with the trees and cast fugitive glancesover its shoulder; a figure bent on some malignant mission. After one of these prowlings themorning papers would scream to their sensation-mad clientele the details of some nightmare crime;column on column of lurid gloating over abominable atrocities; paragraph on paragraph of impossiblesolutions and extravagant, conflicting suspicions. Through it all I felt a supreme sense ofsecurity, for who would for a moment suspect an employee in an undertaking establishment,where Death was supposedly an every-day affair, of seeking surcease from unnamable urgings inthe cold-blooded slaughter of his fellow-beings? I planned each crime with maniacal cunning,varying the manner of my murders so that no one would even dream that all were the work of oneblood-stained pair of hands. The aftermath of each nocturnal venture was an ecstatic hour ofpleasure, pernicious and unalloyed; a pleasure always heightened by the chance that its delicioussource might later be assigned to my gloating administrations in the course of my regular occupation.Sometimes that double and ultimate pleasure did occur—O rare and delicious memory!
During long nights when I clung to the shelter of my sanctuary, I was promptedby the mausolean silence to devise new and unspeakable ways of lavishing my affections uponthe dead that I loved—the dead that gave me life!
One morning Mr. Gresham came much earlier than usual—came to find me stretchedout upon a cold slab deep in ghoulish slumber, my arms wrapped about the stark, stiff, nakedbody of a foetid corpse! He roused me from my salacious dreams, his eyes filled with mingleddetestation and pity. Gently but firmly he told me that I must go, that my nerves were unstrung,that I needed a long rest from the repellent tasks my vocation required, that my impressionableyouth was too deeply affected by the dismal atmosphere of my environment. How little did heknow of the demoniacal desires that spurred me on in my disgusting infirmities! I was wise enoughto see that argument would only strengthen his belief in my potential madness—it was farbetter to leave than to invite discovery of the motive underlying my actions.
After this I dared not stay long in one place for fear some overt act wouldbare my secret to an unsympathetic world. I drifted from city to city, from town to town. Iworked in morgues, around cemeteries, once in a crematory—anywhere that afforded me anopportunity to be near the dead that I so craved.
Then came the world war. I was one of the first to go across, one of the lastto return. Four years of blood-red charnel Hell&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. sickening slime of rain-rottentrenches . .&nbsp;. deafening bursting of hysterical shells&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. monotonousdroning of sardonic bullets&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. smoking frenzies of Phlegethon’s fountains&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.stifling fumes of murderous gases&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. grotesque remnants of smashed and shreddedbodies&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. four years of transcendent satisfaction.
In every wanderer there is a latent urge to return to the scenes of his childhood.A few months later found me making my way through the familiar byways of Fenham. Vacant dilapidatedfarm houses lined the adjacent roadsides, while the years had brought equal retrogression tothe town itself. A mere handful of the houses were occupied, but among these was the one I hadonce called home. The tangled, weed-choked driveway, the broken window panes, the uncared-foracres that stretched behind, all bore mute confirmation of the tales that guarded inquirieshad elicited—that it now sheltered a dissolute drunkard who eked out a meager existencefrom the chores his few neighbors gave him out of sympathy for the mistreated wife and undernourishedchild who shared his lot. All in all, the glamour surrounding my youthful environment was entirelydispelled; so, prompted by some errant foolhardy thought, I next turned my steps toward Bayboro.
Here, too, the years had brought changes, but in reverse order. The small cityI remembered had almost doubled in size despite its wartime depopulation. Instinctively I soughtmy former place of employment, finding it still there but with an unfamiliar name and “Successorto” above the door, for the influenza epidemic had claimed Mr. Gresham, while the boyswere overseas. Some fateful mood impelled me to ask for work. I referred to my tutelage underMr. Gresham with some trepidation, but my fears were groundless—my late employer had carriedthe secret of my unethical conduct with him to the grave. An opportune vacancy insured my immediatere-installation.
Then came vagrant haunting memories of scarlet nights of impious pilgrimages,and an uncontrollable desire to renew those illicit joys. I cast caution to the winds and launchedupon another series of damnable debaucheries. Once more the yellow sheets found welcome materialin the devilish details of my crimes, comparing them to the red weeks of horror that had appalledthe city years before. Once more the police sent out their dragnet and drew into its enmeshingfolds—nothing!
My thirst for the noxious nectar of the dead grew to a consuming fire, andI began to shorten the periods between my odious exploits. I realized that I was treading ondangerous ground, but demoniac desire gripped me in its torturing tentacles and urged me on.
All this time my mind was becoming more and more benumbed to any influenceexcept the satiation of my insane longings. Little details vitally important to one bent onsuch evil escapades escaped me. Somehow, somewhere, I left a vague trace, an elusive clue,behind—not enough to warrant my arrest, but sufficient to turn the tide of suspicion inmy direction. I sensed this espionage, yet was helpless to stem the surging demand for moredead to quicken my enervated soul.
Then came the night when the shrill whistle of the police roused me from myfiendish gloating over the body of my latest victim, a gory razor still clutched tightly inmy hand. With one dexterous motion I closed the blade and thrust it into the pocket of the coatI wore. Nightsticks beat a lusty tattoo upon the door. I crashed the window with a chair, thankingFate I had chosen one of the cheaper tenement districts for my locale. I dropped into a dingyalley as blue-coated forms burst through the shattered door. Over shaky fences, through filthyback yards, past squalid ramshackle houses, down dimly lighted narrow streets I fled. I thoughtat once of the wooded marshes that lay beyond the city and stretched for half a hundred milestill they touched the outskirts of Fenham. If I could reach this goal I would be temporarilysafe. Before dawn I was plunging headlong through the foreboding wasteland, stumbling over therotting roots of half-dead trees whose naked branches stretched out like grotesque arms strivingto encumber me with mocking embraces.
The imps of the nefarious gods to whom I offered my idolatrous prayers musthave guided my footsteps through that menacing morass. A week later, wan, bedraggled, and emaciated,I lurked in the woods a mile from Fenham. So far I had eluded my pursuers, yet I dared not showmyself, for I knew that the alarm must have been sent broadcast. I vaguely hoped I had thrownthem off the trail. After that first frenetic night I had heard no sound of alien voices, nocrashing of heavy bodies through the underbrush. Perhaps they had concluded that my body layhidden in some stagnant pool or had vanished forever in the tenacious quagmire.
Hunger gnawed at my vitals with poignant pangs, thirst left my throat parchedand dry. Yet far worse was the unbearable hunger of my starving soul for the stimulus I foundonly in the nearness of the dead. My nostrils quivered in sweet recollection. No longer couldI delude myself with the thought that this desire was a mere whim of the heated imagination.I knew now that it was an integral part of life itself; that without it I should burn out likean empty lamp. I summoned all my remaining energy to fit me for the task of satisfying my accursedappetite. Despite the peril attending my move I set out to reconnoiter, skirting the shelteringshadows like an obscene wraith. Once more I felt that strange sensation of being led by someunseen satellite of Satan. Yet even my sin-steeped soul revolted for a moment when I found myselfbefore my native abode, the scene of my youthful hermitage.
Then these disquieting memories faded. In their place came overwhelming lustfuldesire. Behind the rotting walls of this old house lay my prey. A moment later I had raisedone of the shattered windows and climbed over the sill. I listened for a moment, every sensealert, every muscle tensed for action. The silence reassured me. With cat-like tread I stolethrough the familiar rooms until stertorous snores indicated the place where I was to find surceasefrom my sufferings. I allowed myself a sigh of anticipatory ecstasy as I pushed open the doorof the bedchamber. Panther-like I made my way to the supine form stretched out in drunken stupor.The wife and child—where were they?—well, they could wait. My clutching fingers gropedfor his throat.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Hours later I was again the fugitive, but a new-found stolen strength was mine.Three silent forms slept to wake no more. It was not until the garish light of day penetratedmy hiding-place that I visualized the certain consequences of my rashly purchased relief. Bythis time the bodies must have been discovered. Even the most obtuse of the rural police mustsurely link the tragedy with my flight from the nearby city. Besides, for the first time I hadbeen careless enough to leave some tangible proof of my identity—my fingerprints on thethroats of the newly dead. All day I shivered in nervous apprehension. The mere crackling ofa dry twig beneath my feet conjured mental images that appalled me. That night, under coverof the protecting darkness I skirted Fenham and made for the woods that lay beyond. Before dawncame the first definite hint of renewed pursuit—the distant baying of hounds.
Through the long night I pressed on, but by morning I could feel my artificialstrength ebbing. Noon brought once more the insistent call of the contaminating curse, and Iknew I must fall by the way unless I could once more experience that exotic intoxication thatcame only with the proximity of the loved dead. I had traveled in a wide semicircle. If I pushedsteadily ahead, midnight would bring me to the cemetery where I had laid away my parents yearsbefore. My only hope, I felt certain, lay in reaching this goal before I was overtaken. Witha silent prayer to the devils that dominated my destiny I turned leaden feet in the directionof my last stronghold.
God! Can it be that a scant twelve hours have passed since I started for myghostly sanctuary? I have lived an eternity in each leaden hour. But I have reached a rich reward.The noxious odors of this neglected spot are frankincense to my suffering soul!
The first streaks of dawn are graying the horizon. They are coming! My sharpears catch the far-off howling of the dogs! It is but a matter of minutes before they find meand shut me away forever from the rest of the world, to spend my days in ravaging yearningstill at last I join the dead I love!
They shall not take me! A way of escape is open! A coward’s choice, perhaps,but better—far better—than endless months of nameless misery. I will leave this recordbehind me that some soul may perhaps understand why I make this choice.
The razor! It has nestled forgotten in my pocket since my flight from Bayboro.Its blood-stained blade gleams oddly in the waning light of the thin-edged moon. One slashingstroke across my left wrist and deliverance is assured.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Warm, fresh blood spatters grotesque patterns on dingy, decrepit slabs&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.phantasmal hordes swarm over the rotting graves&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. spectral fingers beckonme&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ethereal fragments of unwritten melodies rise in celestial crescendo&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.distant stars dance drunkenly in demoniac accompaniment&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a thousand tinyhammers beat hideous dissonances on anvils inside my chaotic brain&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. grayghosts of slaughtered spirits parade in mocking silence before me&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. scorchingtongues of invisible flame sear the brand of Hell upon my sickened soul&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.I can—write—no—more.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
