I went to Ellston Beach not only for the pleasures of sun and ocean, but to rest a weary mind.Since I knew no person in the little town, which thrives on summer vacationists and presentsonly blank windows during most of the year, there seemed no likelihood that I might be disturbed.This pleased me, for I did not wish to see anything but the expanse of pounding surf and thebeach lying before my temporary home.
My long work of the summer was completed when I left the city, and the largemural design produced by it had been entered in the contest. It had taken me the bulk of theyear to finish the painting, and when the last brush was cleaned I was no longer reluctant toyield to the claims of health and find rest and seclusion for a time. Indeed, when I had beena week on the beach I recalled only now and then the work whose success had so recently seemedall-important. There was no longer the old concern with a hundred complexities of colour andornament; no longer the fear and mistrust of my ability to render a mental image actual, andturn by my own skill alone the dim-conceived idea into the careful draught of a design. Andyet that which later befell me by the lonely shore may have grown solely from the mental constitutionbehind such concern and fear and mistrust. For I have always been a seeker, a dreamer, and aponderer on seeking and dreaming; and who can say that such a nature does not open latent eyessensitive to unsuspected worlds and orders of being?
Now that I am trying to tell what I saw I am conscious of a thousand maddeninglimitations. Things seen by the inward sight, like those flashing visions which come as we driftinto the blankness of sleep, are more vivid and meaningful to us in that form than when we havesought to weld them with reality. Set a pen to a dream, and the colour drains from it. The inkwith which we write seems diluted with something holding too much of reality, and we find thatafter all we cannot delineate the incredible memory. It is as if our inward selves, releasedfrom the bonds of daytime and objectivity, revelled in prisoned emotions which are hastily stifledwhen we would translate them. In dreams and visions lie the greatest creations of man, for onthem rests no yoke of line or hue. Forgotten scenes, and lands more obscure than the goldenworld of childhood, spring into the sleeping mind to reign until awakening puts them to rout.Amid these may be attained something of the glory and contentment for which we yearn; some adumbrationof sharp beauties suspected but not before revealed, which are to us as the Grail to holy spiritsof the mediaeval world. To shape these things on the wheel of art, to seek to bring some fadedtrophy from that intangible realm of shadow and gossamer, requires equal skill and memory. Foralthough dreams are in all of us, few hands may grasp their moth-wings without tearing them.
Such skill this narrative does not have. If I might, I would reveal to youthe hinted events which I perceived dimly, like one who peers into an unlit realm and glimpsesforms whose motion is concealed. In my mural design, which then lay with a multitude of othersin the building for which they were planned, I had striven equally to catch a trace of thiselusive shadow-world, and had perhaps succeeded better than I shall now succeed. My stay inEllston was to await the judging of that design; and when days of unfamiliar leisure had givenme perspective, I discovered that—in spite of those weaknesses which a creator always detectsmost clearly—I had indeed managed to retain in line and colour some fragments snatchedfrom the endless world of imagining. The difficulties of the process, and the resulting strainon all my powers, had undermined my health and brought me to the beach during this period ofwaiting.
Since I wished to be wholly alone, I rented (to the delight of the incredulousowner) a small house some distance from the village of Ellston—which, because of the waningseason, was alive with a moribund bustle of tourists, uniformly uninteresting to me. The house,dark from the sea-wind though it had not been painted, was not even a satellite of the village;but swung below it on the coast like a pendulum beneath a still clock, quite alone upon a hillof weed-grown sand. Like a solitary warm animal it crouched facing the sea, and its inscrutabledirty windows stared upon a lonely realm of earth and sky and enormous sea. It will not do touse too much imagining in a narrative whose facts, could they be augmented and fitted into amosaic, would be strange enough in themselves; but I thought the little house was lonely whenI saw it, and that like myself, it was conscious of its meaningless nature before the greatsea.
I took the place in late August, arriving a day before I was expected, andencountering a van and two workingmen unloading the furniture provided by the owner. I did notknow then how long I would stay, and when the truck that brought the goods had left I settledmy small luggage and locked the door (feeling very proprietary about having a house after monthsof a rented room) to go down the weedy hill and on the beach. Since it was quite square andhad but one room, the house required little exploration. Two windows in each side provided agreat quantity of light, and somehow a door had been squeezed in as an afterthought on the oceanwardwall. The place had been built about ten years previously, but on account of its distance fromEllston village was difficult to rent even during the active summer season. There being no fireplace,it stood empty and alone from October until far into spring. Though actually less than a milebelow Ellston, it seemed more remote; since a bend in the coast caused one to see only grassydunes in the direction of the village.
The first day, half-gone when I was installed, I spent in the enjoyment ofsun and restless water—things whose quiet majesty made the designing of murals seem distantand tiresome. But this was the natural reaction to a long concern with one set of habits andactivities. I was through with my work and my vacation was begun. This fact, while elusive forthe moment, showed in everything which surrounded me that afternoon of my arrival; and in theutter change from old scenes. There was an effect of bright sun upon a shifting sea of waveswhose mysteriously impelled curves were strewn with what appeared to be rhinestones. Perhapsa watercolour might have caught the solid masses of intolerable light which lay upon the beachwhere the sea mingled with the sand. Although the ocean bore her own hue, it was dominated whollyand incredibly by the enormous glare. There was no other person near me, and I enjoyed the spectaclewithout the annoyance of any alien object upon the stage. Each of my senses was touched in adifferent way, but sometimes it seemed that the roar of the sea was akin to that great brightness,or as if the waves were glaring instead of the sun, each of these being so vigorous and insistentthat impressions coming from them were mingled. Curiously, I saw no one bathing near my littlesquare house during that or succeeding afternoons, although the curving shore included a widebeach even more inviting than that at the village, where the surf was dotted with random figures.I supposed that this was because of the distance and because there had never been other housesbelow the town. Why this unbuilt stretch existed, I could not imagine; since many dwellingsstraggled along the northward coast, facing the sea with aimless eyes.
I swam until the afternoon had gone, and later, having rested, walked intothe little town. Darkness hid the sea from me as I entered, and I found in the dingy lightsof the streets tokens of a life which was not even conscious of the great, gloom-shrouded thinglying so close. There were painted women in tinsel adornments, and bored men who were no longeryoung—a throng of foolish marionettes perched on the lip of the ocean-chasm; unseeing,unwilling to see what lay above them and about, in the multitudinous grandeur of the stars andthe leagues of the night ocean. I walked along that darkened sea as I went back to the barelittle house, sending the beams of my flashlight out upon the naked and impenetrable void. Inthe absence of the moon, this light made a solid bar athwart the walls of the uneasy tide; andI felt an indescribable emotion born of the noise of the waters and the perception of my inconceivablesmallness as I cast that tiny beam upon a realm immense in itself, yet only the black borderof the earthly deep. That nighted deep, upon which ships were moving alone in the darkness whereI could not see them, gave off the murmur of a distant, angry rabble.
When I reached my high residence I knew that I had passed no one during themile’s walk from the village, and yet there somehow lingered an impression that I had beenall the while accompanied by the spirit of the lonely sea. It was, I thought, personified ina shape which was not revealed to me, but which moved quietly about beyond my range of comprehension.It was like those actors who wait behind darkened scenery in readiness for the lines which willshortly call them before our eyes to move and speak in the sudden revelation of the footlights.At last I shook off this fancy and sought my key to enter the place, whose bare walls gave asudden feeling of security.
My cottage was entirely free of the village, as if it had wandered down thecoast and was unable to return; and there I heard nothing of the disturbing clamour when I returnedeach night after supper. I generally stayed but a short while upon the streets of Ellston, thoughsometimes I went into the place for the sake of the walk it provided. There were all the multitudeof curio-shops and falsely regal theater-fronts that clutter vacation towns, but I never wentinto these; and the place seemed useful only for its restaurants. It was astonishing the numberof useless things people found to do.
There was a succession of sun-filled days at first. I rose early, and beheldthe grey sky agleam with promise of sunrise; a prophecy fulfilled as I stood witness. Thosedawns were cold, and their colours faint in comparison to that uniform radiance of day whichgives to every hour the quality of white noon. That great light, so apparent the first day,made each succeeding day a yellow page in the book of time. I noticed that many of the beach-peoplewere displeased by the inordinate sun, whereas I sought it. After grey months of toil the lethargyinduced by a physical existence in a region governed by the simple things—the wind andlight and water—had a prompt effect upon me; and since I was anxious to continue this healingprocess, I spent all my time outdoors in the sunlight. This induced a state at once impassiveand submissive, and gave me a feeling of security against the ravenous night. As darkness isakin to death, so is light to vitality. Through the heritage of a million years ago, when menwere closer to the mother sea, and when the creatures of which we are born lay languid in theshallow, sun-pierced water, we still seek the primal things when we are tired, steeping ourselveswithin their lulling security like those early half-mammals which had not yet ventured uponthe oozy land.
The monotony of the waves gave repose, and I had no other occupation than witnessinga myriad ocean moods. There is a ceaseless change in the waters—colours and shades passover them like the insubstantial expressions of a well-known face; and these are at once communicatedto us by half-recognized senses. When the sea is restless, remembering old ships that have goneover her chasms, there comes up silently in our hearts the longing for a vanished horizon. Butwhen she forgets, we forget also. Though we know her a lifetime, she must always hold an alienair, as if something too vast to have shape were lurking in the universe to which she is a door.The morning ocean, glimmering with a reflected mist of blue-white cloud and expanding diamondfoam, has the eyes of one who ponders on strange things, and her intricately woven webs, throughwhich dart a myriad coloured fishes, hold the air of some great idle thing which will arisepresently from the hoary immemorial chasms and stride upon the land.
I was content for many days, and glad that I had chosen the lonely house whichsat like a small beast upon those rounded cliffs of sand. Among the pleasantly aimless amusementsfostered by such a life, I took to following the edge of the tide (where the waves left a dampirregular outline rimmed with evanescent foam) for long distances; and sometimes I found curiousbits of shell in the chance litter of the sea. There was an astonishing lot of debris on thatinward-curving coast which my bare little house overlooked, and I judged that currents whosecourses diverge from the village beach must reach that spot. At any rate, my pockets—whenI had any—generally held vast stores of trash; most of which I threw away an hour or twoafter picking it up, wondering why I had kept it. Once, however, I found a small bone whosenature I could not identify, save that it was certainly nothing out of a fish; and I kept this,along with a large metal bead whose minutely carven design was rather unusual. This latter depicteda fishy thing against a patterned background of seaweed instead of the usual floral or geometricaldesigns, and was still clearly traceable though worn with years of tossing in the surf. SinceI had never seen anything like it, I judged that it represented some fashion, now forgotten,of a previous year at Ellston, where similar fads were common.
I had been there perhaps a week when the weather began a gradual change. Eachstage of this progressive darkening was followed by another subtly intensified, so that in theend the entire atmosphere surrounding me had shifted from day to evening. This was more obviousto me in a series of mental impressions than in what I actually witnessed, for the small housewas lonely under the grey skies, and there was sometimes a beating wind that came out of theocean bearing moisture. The sun was displaced by long intervals of cloudiness—layers ofgrey mist beyond whose unknown depth the sun lay cut off. Though it might glare with the oldintensity above that enormous veil, it could not penetrate. The beach was a prisoner in a huelessvault for hours at a time, as if something of the night were welling into other hours.
Although the wind was invigorating and the ocean whipped into little churningspirals of activity by the vagrant flapping, I found the water growing chill, so that I couldnot stay in it as long as I had done previously, and thus I fell into the habit of long walks,which—when I was unable to swim—provided the exercise that I was so careful to obtain.These walks covered a greater range of sea-edge than my previous wanderings, and since the beachextended in a stretch of miles beyond the tawdry village, I often found myself wholly isolatedupon an endless area of sand as evening drew close. When this occurred, I would stride hastilyalong the whispering sea-border, following the outline so that I should not wander inland andlose my way. And sometimes, when these walks were late (as they grew increasingly to be) I wouldcome upon the crouching house that looked like a harbinger of the village. Insecure upon thewind-gnawed cliffs, a dark blot upon the morbid hues of the ocean sunset, it was more lonelythan by the full light of either orb; and seemed to my imagination like a mute, questioningface turned toward me expectant of some action. That the place was isolated I have said, andthis at first pleased me; but in that brief evening hour when the sun left a gore-splattereddecline and darkness lumbered on like an expanding shapeless blot, there was an alien presenceabout the place: a spirit, a mood, an impression that came from the surging wind, the giganticsky, and that sea which drooled blackening waves upon a beach grown abruptly strange. At thesetimes I felt an uneasiness which had no very definite cause, although my solitary nature hadmade me long accustomed to the ancient silence and the ancient voice of nature. These misgivings,to which I could have put no sure name, did not affect me long, yet I think now that all thewhile a gradual consciousness of the ocean’s immense loneliness crept upon me, a lonelinessthat was made subtly horrible by intimations—which were never more than such—of someanimation or sentience preventing me from being wholly alone.
The noisy, yellow streets of the town, with their curiously unreal activity,were very far away, and when I went there for my evening meal (mistrusting a diet entirely ofmy own ambiguous cooking) I took increasing and quite unreasonable care that I should returnto the cottage before the late darkness, although I was often abroad until ten or so.
You will say that such action is unreasonable; that if I had feared the darknessin some childish way, I would have entirely avoided it. You will ask me why I did not leavethe place since its loneliness was depressing me. To all this I have no reply, save that whateverunrest I felt, whatever of remote disturbance there was to me in brief aspects of the darkeningsun or in the eager salt-brittle wind or in the robe of the dark sea that lay crumpled likean enormous garment so close to me, was something which had an origin half in my own heart,which showed itself only at fleeting moments, and which had no very long effect upon me. Inthe recurrent days of diamond light, with sportive waves flinging blue peaks at the baskingshore, the memory of dark moods seemed rather incredible, yet only an hour or two afterwardI might again experience those moods, and descend to a dim region of despair.
Perhaps these inward emotions were only a reflection of the sea’s ownmood; for although half of what we see is coloured by the interpretation placed upon it by ourminds, many of our feelings are shaped quite distinctly by external, physical things. The seacan bind us to her many moods, whispering to us by the subtle token of a shadow or a gleam uponthe waves, and hinting in these ways of her mournfulness or rejoicing. Always, she is rememberingold things, and these memories, though we may not grasp them, are imparted to us, so that weshare her gaiety or remorse. Since I was doing no work, seeing no person that I knew, I wasperhaps susceptible to shades of her cryptic meaning which would have been overlooked by another.The ocean ruled my life during the whole of that late summer; demanding it as recompense forthe healing she had brought me.
There were drownings at the beach that year, and while I heard of these onlycasually (such is our indifference to a death which does not concern us, and to which we arenot witness), I knew that their details were unsavoury. The people who died—some of themswimmers of a skill beyond the average—were sometimes not found until many days had elapsed,and the hideous vengeance of the deep had scourged their rotten bodies. It was as if the seahad dragged them into a chasm-lair and had mulled them about in the darkness until, satisfiedthat they were no longer of any use, she had floated them ashore in a ghastly state. No oneseemed to know what had caused these deaths. Their frequency excited alarm among the timid, sincethe undertow at Ellston was not strong, and since there were known to be no sharks at hand.Whether the bodies showed marks of any attacks I did not learn, but the dread of a death whichmoves among the waves and comes on lone people from a lightless, motionless place is a dreadwhich men know and do not like. They must quickly find a reason for such a death, even if thereare no sharks. Since sharks formed only a suspected cause, and one never to my knowledge confirmed,the swimmers who continued during the rest of the season were on guard against treacherous tidesrather than against any possible sea-animal.
Autumn, indeed, was not a great distance off, and some people used this asan excuse for leaving the sea, where men were snared by death, and going to the security ofinland fields, where one cannot even hear the ocean. So August ended, and I had been at thebeach many days.
There had been a threat of a storm since the fourth of the new month, and onthe sixth, when I set out for a walk in the damp wind, there was a mass of formless cloud, colourlessand oppressive, above the ruffled leaden sea. The motion of the wind, directed toward no especialgoal but stirring uneasily, provided a sensation of coming animation—a hint of life inthe elements which might be the long-expected storm. I had eaten my luncheon at Ellston, andthough the heavens seemed the closing lid of a great casket, I ventured far down the beach andaway from both the town and my no-longer-to-be-seen house. As the universal grey became spottedwith a carrion purple—curiously brilliant despite its sombre hue—I found that I wasseveral miles from any possible shelter. This, however, did not seem very important; for despitethe dark skies with their added glow of unknown presage I was in a curious mood of detachmentparalleling that glow—a mood which flashed through a body grown suddenly alert and sensitiveto the outline of shapes and meanings that were previously dim. Obscurely, a memory came tome; suggested by the likeness of the scene to one I had imagined when a story was read to mein childhood. That tale—of which I had not thought for many years—concerned a womanwho was loved by the dark-bearded king of an underwater realm of blurred cliffs where fish-thingslived, and who was taken from the golden-haired youth of her troth by a dark being crowned witha priest-like mitre and having the features of a withered ape. What had remained in the cornerof my fancy was the image of cliffs beneath the water against the hueless, dusky no-sky of sucha realm; and this, though I had forgotten most of the story, was recalled quite unexpectedlyby the same pattern of cliff and sky which I then beheld. The sight was similar to what I hadimagined in a year now lost save for random, incomplete impressions. Suggestions of this storymay have lingered behind certain irritating unfinished memories, and in certain values hintedto my senses by scenes whose actual worth was bafflingly small. Frequently, in flashes of momentaryperception (the conditions more than the object being significant), we feel that certain isolatedscenes and arrangements—a feathery landscape, a woman’s dress along the curve of aroad by afternoon, or the solidity of a century-defying tree against the pale morning sky—holdsomething precious, some golden virtue that we must grasp. And yet when such a scene or arrangementis viewed later, or from another point, we find that it has lost its value and meaning for us.Perhaps this is because the thing we see does not hold that elusive quality, but only suggeststo the mind some very different thing which remains unremembered. The baffled mind, not whollysensing the cause of its flashing appreciation, seizes on the object exciting it, and is surprisedwhen there is nothing of worth therein. Thus it was when I beheld the purpling clouds. Theyheld the stateliness and mystery of old monastery towers at twilight, but their aspect was alsothat of the cliffs in the old fairy-tale. Suddenly reminded of this lost image, I half expectedto see, in the fine-spun dirty foam and among the waves which were now as if they had been pouredof flawed black glass, the horrid figure of that ape-faced creature, wearing a mitre old withverdigris, advancing from its kingdom in some lost gulf to which those waves were sky.
I did not see any such creature from the realm of imagining, but as the chillwind veered, slitting the heavens like a rustling knife, there lay in the gloom of merging cloudand water only a grey object, like a piece of driftwood, tossing obscurely on the foam. Thiswas a considerable distance out, and since it vanished shortly, may not have been wood, buta porpoise coming to the troubled surface.
I soon found that I had stayed too long contemplating the rising storm andlinking my early fancies with its grandeur, for an icy rain began spotting down, bringing amore uniform gloom upon a scene already too dark for the hour. Hurrying along the grey sand,I felt the impact of cold drops upon my back, and before many moments my clothing was soakedthroughout. At first I had run, put to flight by the colourless drops whose pattern hung inlong linking strands from an unseen sky, but after I saw that refuge was too far to reach inanything like a dry state, I slackened my pace, and returned home as if I had walked under clearskies. There was not much reason to hurry, although I did not idle as upon previous occasions.The constraining wet garments were cold upon me; and with the gathering darkness, and the windthat rose endlessly from the ocean, I could not repress a shiver. Yet there was, beside thediscomfort of the precipitous rain, an exhilaration latent in the purplish ravelled masses ofcloud and the stimulated reactions of my body. In a mood half of exultant pleasure from resistingthe rain (which streamed from me now, and filled my shoes and pockets) and half of strange appreciationof those morbid, dominant skies which hovered with dark wings above the shifting eternal sea,I tramped along the grey corridor of Ellston Beach. More rapidly than I had expected the crouchinghouse showed in the oblique, flapping rain, and all the weeds of the sand cliff writhed in accompanimentto the frantic wind, as if they would uproot themselves to join the far-travelling element.Sea and sky had altered not at all, and the scene was that which had accompanied me, save thatthere was now painted upon it the hunching roof that seemed to bend from the assailing rain.I hurried up the insecure steps, and let myself into a dry room, where, unconsciously surprisedthat I was free of the nagging wind, I stood for a moment with water rilling from every inchof me.
There are two windows in the front of that house, one on each side, and theseface nearly straight upon the ocean; which I now saw half obscured by the combined veils ofthe rain and of the imminent night. From these windows I looked as I dressed myself in a motleyarray of dry garments seized from convenient hangers and from a chair too laden to sit upon.I was prisoned on all sides by an unnaturally increased dusk which had filtered down at someundefined hour under cover of the storm. How long I had been on the reaches of wet grey sand,or what the real time was, I could not tell, though a moment’s search produced my watch—fortunatelyleft behind and thus avoiding the uniform wetness of my clothing. I half guessed the hour fromthe dimly seen hands, which were only slightly less indecipherable than the surrounding figures.In another moment my sight penetrated the gloom (greater in the house than beyond the blearedwindow) and saw that it was 6:45.
There had been no one upon the beach as I came in, and naturally I expectedto see no further swimmers that night. Yet when I looked again from the window there appearedsurely to be figures blotting the grime of the wet evening. I counted three moving about insome incomprehensible manner, and close to the house another—which may not have been aperson, but a wave-ejected log, for the surf was now pounding fiercely. I was startled to nolittle degree, and wondered for what purpose those hardy persons stayed out in such a storm.And then I thought that perhaps like myself they had been caught unintentionally in the rainand had surrendered to the watery gusts. In another moment, prompted by a certain civilisedhospitality which overcame my love of solitude, I stepped to the door and emerged momentarily(at the cost of another wetting, for the rain promptly descended upon me in exultant fury) onthe small porch, gesticulating toward the people. But whether they did not see me, or did notunderstand, they made no returning signal. Dim in the evening, they stood as if half-surprised,or as if they awaited some other action from me. There was in their attitude something of thatcryptic blankness, signifying anything or nothing, which the house wore about itself as seenin the morbid sunset. Abruptly there came to me a feeling that a sinister quality lurked aboutthose unmoving figures who chose to stay in the rainy night upon a beach deserted by all people,and I closed the door with a surge of annoyance which sought all too vainly to disguise a deeperemotion of fear; a consuming fright that welled up from the shadows of my consciousness. A momentlater, when I had stepped to the window, there seemed to be nothing outside but the portentousnight. Vaguely puzzled, and even more vaguely frightened—like one who has seen no alarmingthing, but is apprehensive of what may be found in the dark street he is soon compelled to cross—Idecided that I had very possibly seen no one, and that the murky air had deceived me.
The aura of isolation about the place increased that night, though just outof sight on the northward beach a hundred houses rose in the rainy darkness, their light blearedand yellow above streets of polished glass, like goblin-eyes reflected in an oily forest pool.Yet because I could not see them, or even reach them in bad weather—since I had no carnor any way to leave the crouching house except by walking in the figure-haunted darkness—Irealized quite suddenly that I was, to all intents, alone with the dreary sea that rose andsubsided unseen, unkenned, in the mist. And the voice of the sea had become a hoarse groan,like that of something wounded which shifts about before trying to rise.
Fighting away the prevalent gloom with a soiled lamp—for the darknesscrept in at my windows and sat peering obscurely at me from the corners like a patient animal—Iprepared my food, since I had no intention of going to the village. The hour seemed incrediblyadvanced, though it was not yet nine o’clock when I went to bed. Darkness had come earlyand furtively, and throughout the remainder of my stay lingered evasively over each scene andaction which I beheld. Something had settled out of the night—something forever undefined,but stirring a latent sense within me, so that I was like a beast expecting the momentary rustleof an enemy.
There were hours of wind, and sheets of the downpour flapped endlessly on themeagre walls barring it from me. Lulls came in which I heard the mumbling sea, and I could guessthat large formless waves jostled one another in the pallid whine of the winds, and flung onthe beach a spray bitter with salt. Yet in the very monotony of the restless elements I founda lethargic note, a sound that beguiled me, after a time, into slumber grey and colourless asthe night. The sea continued its mad monologue, and the wind her nagging, but these were shutout by the walls of unconsciousness, and for a time the night ocean was banished from a sleepingmind.
Morning brought an enfeebled sun—a sun like that which men will see whenthe earth is old, if there are any men left: a sun more weary than the shrouded, moribund sky.Faint echo of its old image, Phoebus strove to pierce the ragged, ambiguous clouds as I awoke,at moments sending a wash of pale gold rippling across the northwestern interior of my house,at others waning till it was only a luminous ball, like some incredible plaything forgottenon the celestial lawn. After a while the falling rain—which must have continued throughoutthe previous night—succeeded in washing away those vestiges of purple cloud which had beenlike the ocean-cliffs in an old fairy-tale. Cheated alike of the setting and rising sun, thatday merged with the day before, as if the intervening storm had not ushered a long darknessinto the world, but had swollen and subsided into one long afternoon. Gaining heart, the furtivesun exerted all his force in dispelling the old mist, streaked now like a dirty window, andcast it from his realm. The shallow blue day advanced as those grimy wisps retreated, and theloneliness which had encircled me welled back into a watchful place of retreat, whence it wentno farther, but crouched and waited.
The ancient brightness was now once more upon the sun, and the old glitteron the waves, whose playful blue shapes had flocked upon that coast ere man was born, and wouldrejoice unseen when he was forgotten in the sepulchre of time. Influenced by these thin assurances,like one who believes the smile of friendship on an enemy’s features, I opened my door,and as it swung outward, a black spot upon the inward burst of light, I saw the beach washedclean of any track, as if no foot before mine had disturbed the smooth sand. With the quicklift of spirit that follows a period of uneasy depression, I felt—in a purely yieldingfashion and without volition—that my own memory was washed clean of all the mistrust andsuspicion and disease-like fear of a lifetime, just as the filth of the water’s edge succumbsto a particularly high tide, and is carried out of sight. There was a scent of soaked, brackishgrass, like the mouldy pages of a book, commingled with a sweet odour born of the hot sunlightupon inland meadows, and these were borne into me like an exhilarating drink, seeping and tinglingthrough my veins as if they would convey to me something of their own impalpable nature, andfloat me dizzily in the aimless breeze. And conspiring with these things, the sun continuedto shower upon me, like the rain of yesterday, an incessant array of bright spears; as if italso wished to hide that suspected background presence which moved beyond my sight and was betrayedonly by a careless rustle on the borders of my consciousness, or by the aspect of blank figuresstaring out of an ocean void. That sun, a fierce ball solitary in the whirlpool of infinity,was like a horde of golden moths against my upturned face. A bubbling white grail of fire divineand incomprehensible, it withheld from me a thousand promised mirages where it granted one.For the sun did actually seem to indicate realms, secure and fanciful, where if I but knew thepath I might wander in this curious exultation. Such things come of our own natures, for lifehas never yielded for one moment her secrets; and it is only in our interpretation of theirhinted images that we may find ecstasy or dullness, according to a deliberately induced mood.Yet ever and again we must succumb to her deceptions, believing for the moment that we may thistime find the withheld joy. And in this way the fresh sweetness of the wind, on a morning followingthe haunted darkness (whose evil intimations had given me a greater uneasiness than any menaceto my body), whispered to me of ancient mysteries only half-linked with earth, and of pleasuresthat were the sharper because I felt that I might experience only a part of them. The sun andwind and that scent that rose upon them told me of festivals of gods whose senses are a millionfoldmore poignant than man’s and whose joys are a millionfold more subtle and prolonged. Thesethings, they hinted, could be mine if I gave myself wholly into their bright deceptive power.And the sun, a crouching god with naked celestial flesh, an unknown, too-mighty furnace uponwhich eye might not look, seemed almost sacred in the glow of my newly sharpened emotions. Theethereal thunderous light it gave was something before which all things must worship astonished.The slinking leopard in his green-chasmed forest must have paused briefly to consider its leaf-scatteredrays, and all things nurtured by it must have cherished its bright message on such a day. Forwhen it is absent in the far reaches of eternity, earth will be lost and black against an illimitablevoid. That morning, in which I shared the fire of life, and whose brief moment of pleasure issecure against the ravenous years, was astir with the beckoning of strange things whose elusivenames can never be written.
As I made my way toward the village, wondering how it might look after a long-neededscrubbing by the industrious rain, I saw, tangled in a glimmer of sunlit moisture that was pouredover it like a yellow vintage, a small object like a hand, some twenty feet ahead of me, andtouched by the repetitious foam. The shock and disgust born in my startled mind when I saw thatit was indeed a piece of rotten flesh overcame my new contentment and engendered a shocked suspicionthat it might actually be a hand. Certainly, no fish, or part of one, could assume that look,and I thought I saw mushy fingers wed in decay. I turned the thing over with my foot, not wishingto touch so foul an object, and it adhered stickily to the leather shoe, as if clutching withthe grasp of corruption. The thing, whose shape was nearly lost, held too much resemblance towhat I feared it might be; and I pushed it into the willing grasp of a seething wave, whichtook it from sight with an alacrity not often shown by those ravelled edges of the sea.
Perhaps I should have reported my find, yet its nature was too ambiguous tomake action natural. Since it had been partly eaten by some ocean-dwelling monstrousness,I did not think it identifiable enough to form evidence of an unknown but possible tragedy.The numerous drownings, of course, came into my mind—as well as other things lacking inwholesomeness, some of which remained only as possibilities. Whatever the storm-dislodged fragmentmay have been, and whether it were fish or some animal akin to man, I have never spoken of ituntil now. After all, there was no proof that it had not merely been distorted by rottennessinto that shape.
I approached the town, sickened by the presence of such an object amidst theapparent beauty of the clean beach, though it was horribly typical of the indifference of deathin a nature which mingles rottenness with beauty, and perhaps loves the former more. In EllstonI heard of no recent drowning or other mishap of the sea, and found no reference to such inthe columns of the local paper—the only one I read during my stay.
It is difficult to describe the mental state in which succeeding days foundme. Always susceptible to morbid emotions whose dark anguish might be induced by things outsidemyself, or might spring from the abysses of my own spirit, I was ridden by a feeling which wasnot of fear or despair, or anything akin to these, but was rather a perception of the briefhideousness and underlying filth of life—a feeling partly a reflection of my internal natureand partly a result of broodings induced by that gnawed rotten object which may have been ahand. In those days my mind was a place of shadowed cliffs and dark moving figures, like theancient unsuspected realm which the fairy-tale recalled to me. I felt, in brief agonies of disillusionment,the gigantic blackness of this overwhelming universe, in which my days and the days of my racewere as nothing to the shattered stars; a universe in which each action is vain and even theemotion of grief a wasted thing. The hours I had previously spent in something of regained health,contentment and physical well-being were given now (as if those days of the previous week weresomething definitely ended) to an indolence like that of a man who no longer cares to live.I was engulfed by a piteous lethargic fear of some ineluctable doom which would be, I felt,the completed hate of the peering stars and of the black enormous waves that hoped to claspmy bones within them—the vengeance of all the indifferent, horrendous majesty of the nightocean.
Something of the darkness and restlessness of the sea had penetrated my heart,so that I lived in an unreasoning, unperceiving torment, a torment none the less acute becauseof the subtlety of its origin and the strange, unmotivated quality of its vampiric existence.Before my eyes lay the phantasmagoria of the purpling clouds, the strange silver bauble, therecurrent stagnant foam, the loneliness of that bleak-eyed house, and the mockery of the puppettown. I no longer went to the village, for it seemed only a travesty of life. Like my own soul,it stood upon a dark, enveloping sea—a sea grown slowly hateful to me. And among theseimages, corrupt and festering, dwelt that of an object whose human contours left ever smallerthe doubt of what it once had been.
These scribbled words can never tell of the hideous loneliness (something Idid not even wish assuaged, so deeply was it embedded in my heart) which had insinuated itselfwithin me, mumbling of terrible and unknown things stealthily circling nearer. It was not amadness: rather it was a too clear and naked perception of the darkness beyond this frail existence,lit by a momentary sun no more secure than ourselves: a realization of futility that few canexperience and ever again touch the life about them: a knowledge that turn as I might, battleas I might with all the remaining power of my spirit, I could neither win an inch of groundfrom the inimical universe, nor hold for even a moment the life entrusted to me. Fearing deathas I did life, burdened with a nameless dread yet unwilling to leave the scenes evoking it,I awaited whatever consummating horror was shifting itself in the immense region beyond thewalls of consciousness.
Thus autumn found me, and what I had gained from the sea was lost back intoit. Autumn on the beaches—a drear time betokened by no scarlet leaf nor any other accustomedsign. A frightening sea which changes not, though man changes. There was only a chilling ofthe waters, in which I no longer cared to enter—a further darkening of the pall-like sky,as if eternities of snow were waiting to descend upon the ghastly waves. Once that descent began,it would never cease, but would continue beneath the white and the yellow and the crimson sunand beneath that ultimate small ruby which shall yield only to the futilities of night. Theonce friendly waters babbled meaningfully at me, and eyed me with a strange regard; yet whetherthe darkness of the scene were a reflection of my own broodings, or whether the gloom withinme were caused by what lay without, I could not have told. Upon the beach and me alike had fallena shadow, like that of a bird which flies silently overhead—a bird whose watching eyeswe do not suspect till the image on the ground repeats the image in the sky, and we look suddenlyupward to find that something has been circling above us hitherto unseen.
The day was in late September, and the town had closed the resorts where madfrivolity ruled empty, fear-haunted lives, and where raddled puppets performed their summerantics. The puppets were cast aside, smeared with the painted smiles and frowns they had lastassumed, and there were not a hundred people left in the town. Again the gaudy, stucco-frontedbuildings lining the shore were permitted to crumble undisturbed in the wind. As the month advancedto the day of which I speak, there grew in me the light of a grey, infernal dawn, wherein Ifelt some dark thaumaturgy would be completed. Since I feared such a thaumaturgy less than acontinuance of my horrible suspicions—less than the too-elusive hints of something monstrouslurking behind the great stage—it was with more speculation than actual fear that I waitedunendingly for the day of horror which seemed to be nearing. The day, I repeat, was late inSeptember, though whether the 22nd or 23rd I am uncertain. Such details have fled before therecollection of those uncompleted happenings—episodes with which no orderly existence shouldbe plagued, because of the damnable suggestions (and only suggestions) they contain. I knewthe time with an intuitive distress of spirit—a recognition too deep for me to explain.Throughout those daylight hours I was expectant of the night; impatient, perhaps, so that thesunlight passed like a half-glimpsed reflection in rippled water—a day of whose eventsI recall nothing.
It was long since that portentous storm had cast a shadow over the beach, andI had determined, after hesitations caused by nothing tangible, to leave Ellston, since theyear was chilling and there was no return to my earlier contentment. When a telegram came forme (lying two days in the Western Union office before I was located, so little was my name known)saying that my design had been accepted—winning above all others in the contest—Iset a date for leaving. This news, which earlier in the year would have affected me strongly,I now received with a curious apathy. It seemed as unrelated to the unreality about me, as littlepertinent to me, as if it were directed to another person whom I did not know, and whose messagehad come to me through some accident. None the less, it was that which forced me to completemy plans and leave the cottage by the shore.
There were only four nights of my stay remaining when there occurred the lastof those events whose meaning lies more in the darkly sinister impression surrounding them thanin anything obviously threatening. Night had settled over Ellston and the coast, and a pileof soiled dishes attested both to my recent meal and to my lack of industry. Darkness came asI sat with a cigarette before the seaward window, and it was a liquid which gradually filledthe sky, washing in a floating moon, monstrously elevated. The flat sea bordering upon the gleamingsand, the utter absence of tree or figure or life of any sort, and the regard of that high moonmade the vastness of my surroundings abruptly clear. There were only a few stars pricking through,as if to accentuate by their smallness the majesty of the lunar orb and of the restless, shiftingtide.
I had stayed indoors, fearing somehow to go out before the sea on such a nightof shapeless portent, but I heard it mumbling secrets of an incredible lore. Borne to me ona wind out of nowhere was the breath of some strange and palpitant life—the embodimentof all I had felt and of all I had suspected—stirring now in the chasms of the sky or beneaththe mute waves. In what place this mystery turned from an ancient, horrible slumber I couldnot tell, but like one who stands by a figure lost in sleep, knowing that it will awake in amoment, I crouched by the windows, holding a nearly burnt-out cigarette, and faced the risingmoon.
Gradually there passed into that never-stirring landscape a brilliance intensifiedby the overhead glimmerings, and I seemed more and more under some compulsion to watch whatevermight follow. The shadows were draining from the beach, and I felt that they took with wereall which might have been a harbour for my thoughts when the hinted thing should come. Whereany of them did remain they were ebon and blank: still lumps of darkness sprawling beneath thecruel brilliant rays. The endless tableau of the lunar orb—dead now, whatever her pastwas, and cold as the unhuman sepulchres she bears amid the ruin of dusty centuries older thanman—and the sea—astir, perhaps, with some unkenned life, some forbidden sentience—confrontedme with a horrible vividness. I arose and shut the window; partly because of an inward prompting,but mostly, I think, as an excuse for transferring momentarily the stream of thought. No soundcame to me now as I stood before the closed panes. Minutes or eternities were alike. I was waiting,like my own fearing heart and the motionless scene beyond, for the token of some ineffable life.I had set the lamp upon a box in the western corner of the room, but the moon was brighter,and her bluish rays invaded places where the lamplight was faint. The ancient glow of the roundsilent orb lay upon the beach as it had lain for aeons, and I waited in a torment of expectancymade doubly acute by the delay in fulfillment, and the uncertainty of what strange completionwas to come.
Outside the crouching hut a white illumination suggested vague spectral formswhose unreal, phantasmal motions seemed to taunt my blindness, just as unheard voices mockedmy eager listening. For countless moments I was still, as if Time and the tolling of her greatbell were hushed into nothingness. And yet there was nothing which I might fear: the moon-chiselledshadows were unnatural in no contour, and veiled nothing from my eyes. The night was silent—Iknew that despite my closed window—and all the stars were fixed mournfully in a listeningheaven of dark grandeur. No motion from me then, or word now, could reveal my plight, or tellof the fear-racked brain imprisoned in flesh which dared not break the silence, for all thetorture it brought. As if expectant of death, and assured that nothing could serve to banishthe soul-peril I confronted, I crouched with a forgotten cigarette in my hand. A silent worldgleamed beyond the cheap, dirty windows, and in one corner of the room a pair of dirty oars,placed there before my arrival, shared the vigil of my spirit. The lamp burned endlessly, yieldinga sick light hued like a corpse’s flesh. Glancing at it now and again, for the desperatedistraction it gave, I saw that many bubbles unaccountably rose and vanished in the kerosene-filledbase. Curiously enough, there was no heat from the wick. And suddenly I became aware that thenight as a whole was neither warm nor cold, but strangely neutral—as if all physical forceswere suspended, and all the laws of a calm existence disrupted.
Then, with an unheard splash which sent from the silver water to the shorea line of ripples echoed in fear by my heart, a swimming thing emerged beyond the breakers.The figure may have been that of a dog, a human being, or something more strange. It could nothave known that I watched—perhaps it did not care—but like a distorted fish it swamacross the mirrored stars and dived beneath the surface. After a moment it came up again, andthis time, since it was closer, I saw that it was carrying something across its shoulder. Iknew, then, that it could be no animal, and that it was a man or something like a man, whichcame toward the land from a dark ocean. But it swam with a horrible ease.
As I watched, dread-filled and passive, with the fixed stare of one who awaitsdeath in another yet knows he cannot avert it, the swimmer approached the shore—thoughtoo far down the southward beach for me to discern its outlines or features. Obscurely loping,with sparks of moonlit foam scattered by its quick gait, it emerged and was lost among the inlanddunes.
Now I was possessed by a sudden recurrence of fear, which had died away inthe previous moments. There was a tingling coldness all over me—though the room, whosewindow I dared not open now, was stuffy. I thought it would be very horrible if something wereto enter a window which was not closed.
Now that I could no longer see the figure, I felt that it lingered somewherein the close shadows, or peered hideously at me from whatever window I did not watch. And soI turned my gaze, eagerly and frantically, to each successive pane; dreading that I might indeedbehold an intrusive regarding face, yet unable to keep myself from the terrifying inspection.But though I watched for hours, there was no longer anything upon the beach.
So the night passed, and with it began the ebbing of that strangeness—astrangeness which had surged up like an evil brew within a pot, had mounted to the very rimin a breathless moment, had paused uncertainly there, and had subsided, taking with it whateverunknown message it had borne. Like the stars that promise the revelation of terrible and gloriousmemories, goad us into worship by this deception, and then impart nothing. I had come frighteninglynear to the capture of an old secret which ventured close to man’s haunts and lurkedcautiously just beyond the edge of the known. Yet in the end I had nothing, I was given onlya glimpse of the furtive thing; a glimpse made obscure by the veils of ignorance. I cannot evenconceive what might have shown itself had I been too close to that swimmer who went shorewardinstead of into the ocean. I do not know what might have come if the brew had passed the rimof the pot and poured outward in a swift cascade of revelation. The night ocean withheld whateverit had nurtured. I shall know nothing more.
Even yet I do not know why the ocean holds such a fascination for me. But then,perhaps none of us can solve those things—they exist in defiance of all explanation. Thereare men, and wise men, who do not like the sea and its lapping surf on yellow shores; and theythink us strange who love the mystery of the ancient and unending deep. Yet for me there isa haunting and inscrutable glamour in all the ocean’s moods. It is in the melancholy silverfoam beneath the moon’s waxen corpse; it hovers over the silent and eternal waves thatbeat on naked shores; it is there when all is lifeless save for unknown shapes that glide throughsombre depths. And when I behold the awesome billows surging in endless strength, there comesupon me an ecstasy akin to fear; so that I must abase myself before this mightiness, that Imay not hate the clotted waters and their overwhelming beauty.
Vast and lonely is the ocean, and even as all things came from it, so shallthey return thereto. In the shrouded depths of time none shall reign upon the earth, nor shallany motion be, save in the eternal waters. And these shall beat on dark shores in thunderousfoam, though none shall remain in that dying world to watch the cold light of the enfeebledmoon playing on the swirling tides and coarse-grained sand. On the deep’s margin shallrest only a stagnant foam, gathering about the shells and bones of perished shapes that dweltwithin the waters. Silent, flabby things will toss and roll along empty shores, their sluggishlife extinct. Then all shall be dark, for at last even the white moon on the distant waves shallwink out. Nothing shall be left, neither above nor below the sombre waters. And until that lastmillennium, as after it, the sea will thunder and toss throughout the dismal night.
