| Short Version | Long Version |

[Short Version]
The Royal Press
1902


Chapter 1.

In the spring of 1847, the little village of Ruralville was thrown into a state of exitement by thearrival of a strange brig in the harbour. It carried no flag, &amp; everything about it was such aswould exite suspicion. It had no name. Its captain was named Manuel Ruello. The exitement increasedhowever when John Griggs dissapeared from his home. This was Oct. 4. on Oct. 5 the brig wasgone.

Chapter 2.

The brig, in leaving, was met by a U.S. Frigate and a sharp fight ensued. Whenover, they* missed a man. named Henry Johns.
*(The Frigate.)

Chapter 3.

The brig continued its course in the direction of Madagascar, upon its arrival,The natives fled in all directions. When they came together on the other side of the island, onewas missing. His name was Dahabea.

Chapter 4.

At length it was decided that something must be done. A reward of £5,000 wasoffered for the capture of Manuel Ruello., When startling news came, a nameless brig was wrecked onthe Florida Keys.

Chapter 5.

A ship was sent to Florida, and the mystery was solved. In the exitement of thefight they would launch a sub-marine boat and take what they wanted. there it lay, tranquillyrocking on the waters of the Atlantic when someone called out “John Brown hasdissapeared.” And sure enough John Brown was gone.

Chapter 6.

The finding of the sub-marine boat, and the dissapearance of John Brown, causedrenewed exitement amongst the people, when a new discovery was made. In transcribing this discoveryit is necessary to relate a geographical fact. At the N. Pole there exists a vast continentcomposed of volcanic soil, a portion of which is open to explorers. It is called “No-MansLand.”

Chapter 7.

In the extreme southern part of No-Mans Land, there was found a hut, and severalother signs of human habitation. they promptly entered, and, chained to the floor, lay Griggs,Johns, &amp; Dahabea. They, upon arriving in London, separated, Griggs going to Ruralville, Johnsto the Frigate, &amp; Dahabea to Madagascar.

Chapter 8.

But the mystery of John Brown was still unsolved, so they kept strict watch overthe port at No-Mans Land, and when the sub-marine boat arrived, and the pirates, one by one, andheaded by Manuel Ruello, left the ship, they were met by a rapid fire. After the fight brown wasrecovered.

Chapter 9.

Griggs was royally recieved at Ruralville, &amp; a dinner was given in honour ofHenry Johns, Dahabea was made King of Madagascar., &amp; Brown was made Captain of his ship.

THE END.


[Long Version]
By Anonymus

In the Spring of 1847, the little village of Ruralville was thrown into a state of excitement bythe landing of a strange Brig in the harbour. It carried no flag, and no name was painted on itsside, and everything about it was such as would excite suspicion. It was from Tripoli, Africa, andthe captain was named Manuel Ruello. The Excitement increased, however; when John Griggs, (Themagnate of the villiage) suddenly disappeared from his home. This was the night of October4th—on October 5th the Brig left.

Chapter II

It was 8 bells on the U.S. Frigate “Constitution” when Commander Farragut sighted astrange brig to the westward. It carried no flag, and no name was painted on its side, andeverything about it was such as would excite suspicion. On hailing it put up the Pirates Flag.Farragut ordered a gun fired and no sooner did he fire, than the pirate ship gave them abroadside when the Fight was over Commander Farragut Missed one man named Henry F. Johns.

Chapter III

It was Summer on the Island of Madagascar. And Natives were picking corn, when one cried“Companions! I sight a ship! with no flag and with no name printed on the side and witheverything about it such as would excite Suspicion!” And The Natives fled in all directionswhen They came together on The other side of The Island one was missing his name was Dahabea.

Chapter IV

At length it was Decided Something must be done, Notes were compared. Three abductions were foundto have taken place Dissapearance of John Griggs, Henry John, &amp; Dahabea, were recalled. FinallyAdvertisements were issued offering £5000 reward for the capture of Manuel Ruello, Ship,Prisoners, &amp; crew. When exciting News reached London! An unknown Brig with no name was wreckedof The Florida Keys in America!

Chapter V

The People Hurried to Florida and Beheld———. A steel spindle shaped object Layplacidly on the water Beside the shattered wreck of The brig. “A Submarine Boat”!shouted one “Yes!” shouted another “The mystery is cleared” said a wiselooking man. “In the excitement of the fight they launch the submarine boat and take as manyas they wish, unseen. And———.” “John Brown has disappeared”!shouted a voice from the deck. Sure enough John Brown was gone!

Chapter VI

The Finding of The Submarine boat and the dissapearance of John Brown caused renewed excitementamong the People, and a new discovery was made. In relating this discovery It is necessary torelate a geographical Fact:— At the North Pole there is supposed to exist a vast continentcomposed of volcanic soil, a portion is open to travellers and explorers but it is barren andunfruitful. and thus absolutely Impassable. It is called “No-Mans Land.”

Chapter VII

In the Extreme southern part of No-Mans Land There was found a wharf and a hut &amp;c and everysign of former human habitation. A rusty door-plate was nailed to the hut inscribed in old English“M. Ruello.” This, then, was the home of Michael Ruello. the house brought to light anote book belonging to John Griggs, and The Log of the “Constitution” taken from HenryJohns, and the Madagascar Reaper belong To Dahabea.

Chapter VIII

When about to leave, they Observed a spring on the side of the hut. They pressed it.—A holeappeared in the side of the hut which they promptly entered. They were in a subterranean cavern,the beach ran down to the edge of a black, murky, sea. on the sea lay a dark oblongobject—viz another Submarine boat which they entered. There bound to the cabin Floor LayGriggs, Johns, and Dahabea, all alive and well. They, when arriving in London, separated, Griggsgoing to Ruralville, Johns, To the Constitution and Dahabea to Madagascar.

Chapter IX

But The mystery of John Brown lay still unsolved. So They Kept strict watch over the port atno-mans Land, Hoping The Submarine Boat would arrive. At length, however, it did arrive bearingwith it John Brown. They Fixed upon the 5th of October For the Attack. They ranged along the shoreand Formed Bodies. Finally one by one and Headed by Manuel Ruello The Pirates left the Boat. Theywere (to their astonishment) Met By a Rapid Fire.

Chapter X


Conclusion

The Pirates were at Length defeated and a search was made for Brown. At Length he (the aforesaidBrown) was found. John Gregg was royally received at Ruralville and a dinner was
Dahabea was made King of Madagascar, and Manuel Ruello was Executed at NewgatePrison.

The End
