I.

In a vast room hung with strangely figured arras and carpeted with Bokhara rugs of impressiveage and workmanship four men were sitting around a document-strown table. From the far corners,where odd tripods of wrought-iron were now and then replenished by an incredibly aged negroin sombre livery, came the hypnotic fumes of olibanum; while in a deep niche on one side thereticked a curious coffin-shaped clock whose dial bore baffling hieroglyphs and whose four handsdid not move in consonance with any time system known on this planet. It was a singular anddisturbing room, but well fitted to the business now at hand. For here, in the New Orleans homeof this continent’s greatest mystic, mathematician, and orientalist, there was beingsettled at last the estate of a scarcely less great mystic, scholar, author, and dreamer whohad vanished from the face of the earth four years before.
Randolph Carter, who had all his life sought to escape from the tedium andlimitations of waking reality in the beckoning vistas of dreams and fabled avenues of otherdimensions, disappeared from the sight of man on the seventh of October, 1928, at the age offifty-four. His career had been a strange and lonely one, and there were those who inferredfrom his curious novels many episodes more bizarre than any in his recorded history. His associationwith Harley Warren, the South Carolina mystic whose studies in the primal Naacal language ofthe Himalayan priests had led to such outrageous conclusions, had been close. Indeed, it washe who—one mist-mad, terrible night in an ancient graveyard—had seen Warren descendinto a dank and nitrous vault, never to emerge. Carter lived in Boston, but it was from thewild, haunted hills behind hoary and witch-accursed Arkham that all his forbears had come.And it was amid those ancient, cryptically brooding hills that he had ultimately vanished.
His old servant Parks—who died early in 1930—had spoken of thestrangely aromatic and hideously carven box he had found in the attic, and of the undecipherableparchments and queerly figured silver key which that box had contained; matters of which Carterhad also written to others. Carter, he said, had told him that this key had come down from hisancestors, and that it would help him to unlock the gate to his lost boyhood, and to strangedimensions and fantastic realms which he had hitherto visited only in vague, brief, and elusivedreams. Then one day Carter took the box and its contents and rode away in his car, never toreturn.
Later on people found the car at the side of an old, grass-grown road in thehills behind crumbling Arkham—the hills where Carter’s forbears had once dwelt,and where the ruined cellar of the great Carter homestead still gaped to the sky. It was ina grove of tall elms near by that another of the Carters had mysteriously vanished in 1781,and not far away was the half-rotted cottage where Goody Fowler the witch had brewed her ominouspotions still earlier. The region had been settled in 1692 by fugitives from the witchcrafttrials in Salem, and even now it bore a name for vaguely ominous things scarcely to be envisaged.Edmund Carter had fled from the shadow of Gallows Hill just in time, and the tales of his sorcerieswere many. Now, it seemed, his lone descendant had gone somewhere to join him.
In the car they found the hideously carved box of fragrant wood, and the parchmentwhich no man could read. The Silver Key was gone—presumably with Carter. Further thanthat there was no certain clue. Detectives from Boston said that the fallen timbers of theold Carter place seemed oddly disturbed, and somebody found a handkerchief on the rock-ridged,sinisterly wooded slope behind the ruins near the dreaded cave called the “Snake-Den”.It was then that the country legends about the Snake-Den gained a new vitality. Farmers whisperedof the blasphemous uses to which old Edmund Carter the wizard had put that horrible grotto,and added later tales about the fondness which Randolph Carter himself had had for it when aboy. In Carter’s boyhood the venerable gambrel-roofed homestead was still standing andtenanted by his great-uncle Christopher. He had visited there often, and had talked singularlyabout the Snake-Den. People remembered what he had said about a deep fissure and an unknowninner cave beyond, and speculated on the change he had shewn after spending one whole memorableday in the cavern when he was nine. That was in October, too—and ever after that he hadseemed to have an uncanny knack at prophesying future events.
It had rained late in the night that Carter vanished, and no one was quiteable to trace his footprints from the car. Inside the Snake-Den all was amorphous liquid mudowing to copious seepage. Only the ignorant rustics whispered about the prints they thoughtthey spied where the great elms overhang the road, and on the sinister hillside near the Snake-Den,where the handkerchief was found. Who could pay attention to whispers that spoke of stubby littletracks like those which Randolph Carter’s square-toed boots made when he was a small boy?It was as crazy a notion as that other whisper—that the tracks of old Benijah Corey’speculiar heel-less boots had met the stubby little tracks in the road. Old Benijah had beenthe Carters’ hired man when Randolph was young—but he had died thirty years ago.
It must have been these whispers—plus Carter’s own statement toParks and others that the queerly arabesqued Silver Key would help him unlock the gate of hislost boyhood—which caused a number of mystical students to declare that the missing manhad actually doubled back on the trail of time and returned through forty-five years to thatother October day in 1883 when he had stayed in the Snake-Den as a small boy. When he came outthat night, they argued, he had somehow made the whole trip to 1928 and back—for did henot thereafter know of things which were to happen later? And yet he had never spoken of anythingto happen after 1928.
One student—an elderly eccentric of Providence, Rhode Island, who hadenjoyed a long and close correspondence with Carter—had a still more elaborate theory,and believed that Carter had not only returned to boyhood, but achieved a further liberation,roving at will through the prismatic vistas of boyhood dream. After a strange vision this manpublished a tale of Carter’s vanishing, in which he hinted that the lost one now reignedas king on the opal throne of Ilek-Vad, that fabulous town of turrets atop the hollow cliffsof glass overlooking the twilight sea wherein the bearded and finny Gnorri build their singularlabyrinths.
It was this old man, Ward Phillips, who pleaded most loudly against the apportionmentof Carter’s estate to his heirs—all distant cousins—on the ground that hewas still alive in another time-dimension and might well return some day. Against him was arrayedthe legal talent of one of the cousins, Ernest B. Aspinwall of Chicago, a man ten years Carter’ssenior, but keen as a youth in forensic battles. For four years the contest had raged, butnow the time for apportionment had come, and this vast, strange room in New Orleans was to bethe scene of the arrangements.
It was the home of Carter’s literary and financial executor—thedistinguished Creole student of mysteries and Eastern antiquities, Etienne-Laurent de Marigny.Carter had met de Marigny during the war, when they both served in the French Foreign Legion,and had at once cleaved to him because of their similar tastes and outlook. When, on a memorablejoint furlough, the learned young Creole had taken the wistful Boston dreamer to Bayonne, inthe south of France, and had shewn him certain terrible secrets in the nighted and immemorialcrypts that burrow beneath that brooding, aeon-weighted city, the friendship was forever sealed.Carter’s will had named de Marigny as executor, and now that vivid scholar was reluctantlypresiding over the settlement of the estate. It was sad work for him, for like the old Rhode-Islanderhe did not believe that Carter was dead. But what weight have the dreams of mystics againstthe harsh wisdom of the world?
Around the table in that strange room in the old French quarter sat the menwho claimed an interest in the proceedings. There had been the usual legal advertisements ofthe conference in papers wherever Carter heirs were thought to live, yet only four now sat listeningto the abnormal ticking of that coffin-shaped clock which told no earthly time, and to the bubblingof the courtyard fountain beyond half-curtained, fanlighted windows. As the hours wore on thefaces of the four were half-shrouded in the curling fumes from the tripods, which, piled recklesslywith fuel, seemed to need less and less attention from the silently gliding and increasinglynervous old negro.
There was Etienne de Marigny himself—slim, dark, handsome, moustached,and still young. Aspinwall, representing the heirs, was white-haired, apoplectic-faced, side-whiskered,and portly. Phillips, the Providence mystic, was lean, grey, long-nosed, clean-shaven, andstoop-shouldered. The fourth man was non-committal in age—lean, and with a dark, bearded,singularly immobile face of very regular contour, bound with the turban of a high-caste Brahminand having night-black, burning, almost irisless eyes which seemed to gaze out from a vast distancebehind the features. He had announced himself as the Swami Chandraputra, an adept from Benareswith important information to give; and both de Marigny and Phillips—who had correspondedwith him—had been quick to recognise the genuineness of his mystical pretensions. Hisspeech had an oddly forced, hollow, metallic quality, as if the use of English taxed his vocalapparatus; yet his language was as easy, correct, and idiomatic as any native Anglo-Saxon’s.In general attire he was the normal European civilian, but his loose clothes sat peculiarlybadly on him, while his bushy black beard, Eastern turban, and large white mittens gave himan air of exotic eccentricity.
De Marigny, fingering the parchment found in Carter’s car, was speaking.
“No, I have not been able to make anything of the parchment. Mr. Phillips,here, also gives it up. Col. Churchward declares it is not Naacal, and it looks nothing at alllike the hieroglyphs on that Easter Island wooden club. The carvings on that box, though, dostrongly suggest Easter Island images. The nearest thing I can recall to these parchment characters—noticehow all the letters seem to hang down from horizontal word-bars—is the writing in a bookpoor Harley Warren once had. It came from India while Carter and I were visiting him in 1919,and he never would tell us anything about it. Said it would be better if we didn’t know,and hinted that it might have come originally from some place other than the earth. He tookit with him in December when he went down into the vault in that old graveyard—but neitherhe nor the book ever came to the surface again. Some time ago I sent our friend here—theSwami Chandraputra—a memory-sketch of some of those letters, and also a photostatic copyof the Carter parchment. He believes he may be able to shed light on them after certain referencesand consultations.
“But the key—Carter sent me a photograph of that. Its curious arabesqueswere not letters, but seem to have belonged to the same culture-tradition as the hieroglyphson the parchment. Carter always spoke of being on the point of solving the mystery, though henever gave details. Once he grew almost poetic about the whole business. That antique SilverKey, he said, would unlock the successive doors that bar our free march down the mighty corridorsof space and time to the very Border which no man has crossed since Shaddad with his terrificgenius built and concealed in the sands of Arabia Petraea the prodigious domes and uncountedminarets of thousand-pillared Irem. Half-starved dervishes—wrote Carter—and thirst-crazednomads have returned to tell of that monumental portal, and of the Hand that is sculptured abovethe keystone of the arch, but no man has passed and returned to say that his footprints on thegarnet-strown sands within bear witness to his visit. The key, he surmised, was that for whichthe Cyclopean sculptured Hand vainly grasps.
“Why Carter didn’t take the parchment as well as the key, we cannotsay. Perhaps he forgot it—or perhaps he forbore to take it through recollection of onewho had taken a book of like characters into a vault and never returned. Or perhaps it was reallyimmaterial to what he wished to do.”
As de Marigny paused, old Mr. Phillips spoke in a harsh, shrill voice.
“We can know of Randolph Carter’s wandering only what we dream.I have been to many strange places in dreams, and have heard many strange and significant thingsin Ulthar, beyond the river Skai. It does not appear that the parchment was needed, for certainlyCarter reëntered the world of his boyhood dreams, and is now a king in Ilek-Vad.”
Mr. Aspinwall grew doubly apoplectic-looking as he sputtered.
“Can’t somebody shut that old fool up? We’ve had enough ofthese moonings. The problem is to divide the property, and it’s about time we got to it.”
For the first time Swami Chandraputra spoke in his queerly alien voice.
“Gentlemen, there is more to this matter than you think. Mr. Aspinwalldoes not do well to laugh at the evidence of dreams. Mr. Phillips has taken an incomplete view—perhapsbecause he has not dreamed enough. I, myself, have done much dreaming—we in India havealways done that, just as all the Carters seem to have done it. You, Mr. Aspinwall, as a maternalcousin, are naturally not a Carter. My own dreams, and certain other sources of information,have told me a great deal which you still find obscure. For example, Randolph Carter forgotthat parchment—which he couldn’t then decipher—yet it would have been wellfor him had he remembered to take it. You see, I have really learned pretty much what happenedto Carter after he left his car with the Silver Key at sunset on that seventh of October, fouryears ago.”
Aspinwall audibly sneered, but the others sat up with heightened interest.The smoke from the tripods increased, and the crazy ticking of that coffin-shaped clock seemedto fall into bizarre patterns like the dots and dashes of some alien and insoluble telegraphmessage from outer space. The Hindoo leaned back, half closed his eyes, and continued in thatoddly laboured yet idiomatic voice, while before his audience there began to float a pictureof what had happened to Randolph Carter.

II.

The hills behind Arkham are full of a strange magic—something, perhaps, which the oldwizard Edmund Carter called down from the stars and up from the crypts of nether earth whenhe fled there from Salem in 1692. As soon as Randolph Carter was back among them he knew thathe was close to one of the gates which a few audacious, abhorred, and alien-souled men haveblasted through titan walls betwixt the world and the outside absolute. Here, he felt, and onthis day of the year, he could carry out with success the message he had deciphered months beforefrom the arabesques of that tarnished and incredibly ancient Silver Key. He knew now how itmust be rotated, how it must be held up to the setting sun, and what syllables of ceremony mustbe intoned into the void at the ninth and last turning. In a spot as close to a dark polarityand induced gate as this, it could not fail in its primary function. Certainly, he would restthat night in the lost boyhood for which he had never ceased to mourn.
He got out of the car with the key in his pocket, walking uphill deeper anddeeper into the shadowy core of that brooding, haunted countryside of winding road, vine-grownstone wall, black woodland, gnarled, neglected orchard, gaping-windowed, deserted farmhouse,and nameless ruin. At the sunset hour, when the distant spires of Kingsport gleamed in the ruddyblaze, he took out the key and made the needed turnings and intonations. Only later did he realisehow soon the ritual had taken effect.
Then in the deepening twilight he had heard a voice out of the past. Old BenijahCorey, his great-uncle’s hired man. Had not old Benijah been dead for thirty years? Thirtyyears before when? What was time? Where had he been? Why was it strange that Benijah shouldbe calling him on this seventh of October, 1883? Was he not out later than Aunt Martha had toldhim to stay? What was this key in his blouse pocket, where his little telescope—givenhim by his father on his ninth birthday two months before—ought to be? Had he found itin the attic at home? Would it unlock the mystic pylon which his sharp eye had traced amidstthe jagged rocks at the back of that inner cave behind the Snake-Den on the hill? That was theplace they always coupled with old Edmund Carter the wizard. People wouldn’t go there,and nobody but him had ever noticed or squirmed through the root-choked fissure to that greatblack inner chamber with the pylon. Whose hands had carved that hint of a pylon out of the livingrock? Old Wizard Edmund’s—or others that he had conjured up and commanded?That evening little Randolph ate supper with Uncle Chris and Aunt Martha in the old gambrel-roofedfarmhouse.
Next morning he was up early, and out through the twisted-boughed apple orchardto the upper timber-lot where the mouth of the Snake-Den lurked black and forbidding amongstgrotesque, overnourished oaks. A nameless expectancy was upon him, and he did not even noticethe loss of his handkerchief as he fumbled in his blouse pocket to see if the queer Silver Keywas safe. He crawled through the dark orifice with tense, adventurous assurance, lighting hisway with matches taken from the sitting-room. In another moment he had wriggled through theroot-choked fissure at the farther end, and was in the vast, unknown inner grotto whose ultimaterock wall seemed half like a monstrous and consciously shapen pylon. Before that dank, drippingwall he stood silent and awestruck, lighting one match after another as he gazed. Was that stonybulge above the keystone of the imagined arch really a gigantic sculptured hand? Then he drewforth the Silver Key, and made motions and intonations whose source he could only dimly remember.Was anything forgotten? He knew only that he wished to cross the barrier to the untrammelledland of his dreams and the gulfs where all dimensions dissolve in the absolute.

III.

What happened then is scarcely to be described in words. It is full of those paradoxes, contradictions,and anomalies which have no place in waking life, but which fill our more fantastic dreams,and are taken as matters of course till we return to our narrow, rigid, objective world of limitedcausation and tri-dimensional logic. As the Hindoo continued his tale, he had difficulty inavoiding what seemed—even more than the notion of a man transferred through the yearsto boyhood—an air of trivial, puerile extravagance. Mr. Aspinwall, in disgust, gave anapoplectic snort and virtually stopped listening.
For the rite of the Silver Key, as practiced by Randolph Carter in that black,haunted cave within a cave, did not prove unavailing. From the first gesture and syllable anaura of strange, awesome mutation was apparent—a sense of incalculable disturbance andconfusion in time and space, yet one which held no hint of what we recognise as motion and duration.Imperceptibly, such things as age and location ceased to have any significance whatever. Theday before, Randolph Carter had miraculously leaped a gulf of years. Now there was no distinctionbetween boy and man. There was only the entity Randolph Carter, with a certain store of imageswhich had lost all connexion with terrestrial scenes and circumstances of acquisition. A momentbefore, there had been an inner cave with vague suggestions of a monstrous arch and giganticsculptured hand on the farther wall. Now there was neither cave nor absence of cave; neitherwall nor absence of wall. There was only a flux of impressions not so much visual as cerebral,amidst which the entity that was Randolph Carter experienced perceptions or registrations ofall that his mind revolved on, yet without any clear consciousness of the way in which he receivedthem.
By the time the rite was over Carter knew that he was in no region whose placecould be told by earth’s geographers, and in no age whose date history could fix. Forthe nature of what was happening was not wholly unfamiliar to him. There were hints of it inthe cryptical Pnakotic fragments, and a whole chapter in the forbidden Necronomiconof the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred had taken on significance when he had deciphered the designsgraven on the Silver Key. A gate had been unlocked—not indeed the Ultimate Gate, butone leading from earth and time to that extension of earth which is outside time, and from whichin turn the Ultimate Gate leads fearsomely and perilously to the Last Void which is outsideall earths, all universes, and all matter.
There would be a Guide—and a very terrible one; a Guide who had beenan entity of earth millions of years before, when man was undreamed of, and when forgotten shapesmoved on a steaming planet building strange cities among whose last, crumbling ruins the earliestmammals were to play. Carter remembered what the monstrous Necronomicon had vaguely anddisconcertingly adumbrated concerning that Guide.
“And while there are those,” the mad Arab had written, “whohave dared to seek glimpses beyond the Veil, and to accept HIM as a Guide, they would have beenmore prudent had they avoided commerce with HIM; for it is written in the Book of Thoth howterrific is the price of a single glimpse. Nor may those who pass ever return, for in the Vastnessestranscending our world are Shapes of darkness that seize and bind. The Affair that shamblethabout in the night, the Evil that defieth the Elder Sign, the Herd that stand watch at the secretportal each tomb is known to have, and that thrive on that which groweth out of the tenantswithin—all these Blacknesses are lesser than HE Who guardeth the Gateway; HE Who willguide the rash one beyond all the worlds into the Abyss of unnamable Devourers. For HE is’UMRAT-TAWIL, the Most Ancient One, which the scribe rendereth as THE PROLONGED OF LIFE.”
Memory and imagination shaped dim half-pictures with uncertain outlines amidstthe seething chaos, but Carter knew that they were of memory and imagination only. Yet he feltthat it was not chance which built these things in his consciousness, but rather some vast reality,ineffable and undimensioned, which surrounded him and strove to translate itself into the onlysymbols he was capable of grasping. For no mind of earth may grasp the extensions of shape whichinterweave in the oblique gulfs outside time and the dimensions we know.
There floated before Carter a cloudy pageantry of shapes and scenes which hesomehow linked with earth’s primal, aeon-forgotten past. Monstrous living things moveddeliberately through vistas of fantastic handiwork that no sane dream ever held, and landscapesbore incredible vegetation and cliffs and mountains and masonry of no human pattern. There werecities under the sea, and denizens thereof; and towers in great deserts where globes and cylindersand nameless winged entities shot off into space or hurtled down out of space. All this Cartergrasped, though the images bore no fixed relation to one another or to him. He himself had nostable form or position, but only such shifting hints of form and position as his whirling fancysupplied.
He had wished to find the enchanted regions of his boyhood dreams, where galleyssail up the river Oukranos past the gilded spires of Thran, and elephant caravans tramp throughperfumed jungles in Kled beyond forgotten palaces with veined ivory columns that sleep lovelyand unbroken under the moon. Now, intoxicated with wider visions, he scarcely knew what he sought.Thoughts of infinite and blasphemous daring rose in his mind, and he knew he would face thedreaded Guide without fear, asking monstrous and terrible things of him.
All at once the pageant of impressions seemed to achieve a vague kind of stabilisation.There were great masses of towering stone, carven into alien and incomprehensible designs anddisposed according to the laws of some unknown, inverse geometry. Light filtered down from asky of no assignable colour in baffling, contradictory directions, and played almost sentientlyover what seemed to be a curved line of gigantic hieroglyphed pedestals more hexagonal thanotherwise and surmounted by cloaked, ill-defined Shapes.
There was another Shape, too, which occupied no pedestal, but which seemedto glide or float over the cloudy, floor-like lower level. It was not exactly permanent in outline,but held transient suggestions of something remotely preceding or paralleling the human form,though half as large again as an ordinary man. It seemed to be heavily cloaked, like the Shapeson the pedestals, with some neutral-coloured fabric; and Carter could not detect any eye-holesthrough which it might gaze. Probably it did not need to gaze, for it seemed to belong to anorder of being far outside the merely physical in organisation and faculties.
A moment later Carter knew that this was so, for the Shape had spoken to hismind without sound or language. And though the name it uttered was a dreaded and terrible one,Randolph Carter did not flinch in fear. Instead, he spoke back, equally without sound or language,and made those obeisances which the hideous Necronomicon had taught him to make. Forthis Shape was nothing less than that which all the world has feared since Lomar rose out ofthe sea and the Winged Ones came to earth to teach the Elder Lore to man. It was indeed thefrightful Guide and Guardian of the Gate—’Umr at-Tawil, the ancient one, which thescribe rendereth the Prolonged of Life.
The Guide knew, as he knew all things, of Carter’s quest and coming,and that this seeker of dreams and secrets stood before him unafraid. There was no horror ormalignity in what he radiated, and Carter wondered for a moment whether the mad Arab’sterrific blasphemous hints, and extracts from the Book of Thoth, might not have come from envyand a baffled wish to do what was now about to be done. Or perhaps the Guide reserved his horrorand malignity for those who feared. As the radiations continued, Carter mentally interpretedthem in the form of words.
“I am indeed that Most Ancient One,” said the Guide, “ofwhom you know. We have awaited you—the Ancient Ones and I. You are welcome, even thoughlong delayed. You have the Key, and have unlocked the First Gate. Now the Ultimate Gate is readyfor your trial. If you fear, you need not advance. You may still go back unharmed the way youcame. But if you choose to advance&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
The pause was ominous, but the radiations continued to be friendly. Carterhesitated not a moment, for a burning curiosity drove him on.
“I will advance,” he radiated back, “and I accept you asmy Guide.”
At this reply the Guide seemed to make a sign by certain motions of his robewhich may or may not have involved the lifting of an arm or some homologous member. A secondsign followed, and from his well-learnt lore Carter knew that he was at last very close to theUltimate Gate. The light now changed to another inexplicable colour, and the Shapes on thequasi-hexagonal pedestals became more clearly defined. As they sat more erect, their outlinesbecame more like those of men, though Carter knew that they could not be men. Upon their cloakedheads there now seemed to rest tall, uncertainly coloured mitres, strangely suggestive of thoseon certain nameless figures chiselled by a forgotten sculptor along the living cliffs of a high,forbidden mountain in Tartary; while grasped in certain folds of their swathings were long sceptreswhose carven heads bodied forth a grotesque and archaic mystery.
Carter guessed what they were, whence they came, and Whom they served; andguessed, too, the price of their service. But he was still content, for at one mighty venturehe was to learn all. Damnation, he reflected, is but a word bandied about by those whose blindnessleads them to condemn all who can see, even with a single eye. He wondered at the vast conceitof those who had babbled of the malignant Ancient Ones, as if They could pause from theireverlasting dreams to wreak a wrath upon mankind. As well, he thought, might a mammoth pauseto visit frantic vengeance on an angleworm. Now the whole assemblage on the vaguely hexagonalpillars was greeting him with a gesture of those oddly carven sceptres, and radiating a messagewhich he understood:
“We salute you, Most Ancient One, and you, Randolph Carter, whose daringhas made you one of us.”
Carter saw now that one of the pedestals was vacant, and a gesture of the MostAncient One told him it was reserved for him. He saw also another pedestal, taller than therest, and at the centre of the oddly curved line (neither semicircle nor ellipse, parabola norhyperbola) which they formed. This, he guessed, was the Guide’s own throne. Moving andrising in a manner hardly definable, Carter took his seat; and as he did so he saw that theGuide had likewise seated himself.
Gradually and mistily it became apparent that the Most Ancient One was holdingsomething—some object clutched in the outflung folds of his robe as if for the sight,or what answered for sight, of the cloaked Companions. It was a large sphere or apparent sphereof some obscurely iridescent metal, and as the Guide put it forward a low, pervasive half-impressionof sound began to rise and fall in intervals which seemed to be rhythmic even thoughthey followed no rhythm of earth. There was a suggestion of chanting—or what human imaginationmight interpret as chanting. Presently the quasi-sphere began to grow luminous, and as it gleamedup into a cold, pulsating light of unassignable colour Carter saw that its flickerings conformedto the alien rhythm of the chant. Then all the mitred, sceptre-bearing Shapes on the pedestalscommenced a slight, curious swaying in the same inexplicable rhythm, while nimbuses of unclassifiablelight—resembling that of the quasi-sphere—played round their shrouded heads.
The Hindoo paused in his tale and looked curiously at the tall, coffin-shapedclock with the four hands and hieroglyphed dial, whose crazy ticking followed no known rhythmof earth.
“You, Mr. de Marigny,” he suddenly said to his learned host, “donot need to be told the particular alien rhythm to which those cowled Shapes on the hexagonalpillars chanted and nodded. You are the only one else—in America—who has had a tasteof the Outer Extension. That clock—I suppose it was sent you by the Yogi poor Harley Warrenused to talk about—the seer who said that he alone of living men had been to Yian-Ho,the hidden legacy of sinister, aeon-old Leng, and had borne certain things away from that dreadfuland forbidden city. I wonder how many of its subtler properties you know? If my dreams and readingsbe correct, it was made by those who knew much of the First Gateway. But let me go on with mytale.”
At last, continued the Swami, the swaying and the suggestion of chanting ceased,the lambent nimbuses around the now drooping and motionless heads faded away, while the cloakedShapes slumped curiously on their pedestals. The quasi-sphere, however, continued to pulsatewith inexplicable light. Carter felt that the Ancient Ones were sleeping as they had been whenhe first saw them, and he wondered out of what cosmic dreams his coming had wakened them. Slowlythere filtered into his mind the truth that this strange chanting ritual had been one of instruction,and that the Companions had been chanted by the Most Ancient One into a new and peculiar kindof sleep, in order that their dreams might open the Ultimate Gate to which the Silver Key wasa passport. He knew that in the profundity of this deep sleep they were contemplating unplumbedvastnesses of utter and absolute Outsideness with which the earth had nothing to do, and thatthey were to accomplish that which his presence had demanded.
The Guide did not share this sleep, but seemed still to be giving instructionsin some subtle, soundless way. Evidently he was implanting images of those things which hewished the Companions to dream; and Carter knew that as each of the Ancient Ones pictured theprescribed thought, there would be born the nucleus of a manifestation visible to his own earthlyeyes. When the dreams of all the Shapes had achieved a oneness, that manifestation would occur,and everything he required be materialised, through concentration. He had seen such thingson earth—in India, where the combined, projected will of a circle of adepts can make athought take tangible substance, and in hoary Atlaanât, of which few men dare speak.
Just what the Ultimate Gate was, and how it was to be passed, Carter couldnot be certain; but a feeling of tense expectancy surged over him. He was conscious of havinga kind of body, and of holding the fateful Silver Key in his hand. The masses of towering stoneopposite him seemed to possess the evenness of a wall, toward the centre of which his eyes wereirresistibly drawn. And then suddenly he felt the mental currents of the Most Ancient One ceaseto flow forth.
For the first time Carter realised how terrific utter silence, mental and physical,may be. The earlier moments had never failed to contain some perceptible rhythm, if only thefaint, cryptical pulse of the earth’s dimensional extension, but now the hush of the abyssseemed to fall upon everything. Despite his intimations of body, he had no audible breath; andthe glow of ’Umr at-Tawil’s quasi-sphere had grown petrifiedly fixed and unpulsating.A potent nimbus, brighter than those which had played round the heads of the Shapes, blazedfrozenly over the shrouded skull of the terrible Guide.
A dizziness assailed Carter, and his sense of lost orientation waxed a thousandfold.The strange lights seemed to hold the quality of the most impenetrable blacknesses heaped uponblacknesses, while about the Ancient Ones, so close on their pseudo-hexagonal thrones, therehovered an air of the most stupefying remoteness. Then he felt himself wafted into immeasurabledepths, with waves of perfumed warmth lapping against his face. It was as if he floated in atorrid, rose-tinctured sea; a sea of drugged wine whose waves broke foaming against shores ofbrazen fire. A great fear clutched him as he half saw that vast expanse of surging sea lappingagainst its far-off coast. But the moment of silence was broken—the surgings were speakingto him in a language that was not of physical sound or articulate words.
“The man of Truth is beyond good and evil,” intoned a voice thatwas not a voice. “The man of Truth has ridden to All-Is-One. The man of Truth has learntthat Illusion is the only reality, and that substance is an impostor.”
And now, in that rise of masonry to which his eyes had been so irresistiblydrawn, there appeared the outline of a titanic arch not unlike that which he thought he hadglimpsed so long ago in that cave within a cave, on the far, unreal surface of the three-dimensionedearth. He realised that he had been using the Silver Key—moving it in accord with an unlearntand instinctive ritual closely akin to that which had opened the Inner Gate. That rose-drunkensea which lapped his cheeks was, he realised, no more or less than the adamantine mass of thesolid wall yielding before his spell, and the vortex of thought with which the Ancient Oneshad aided his spell. Still guided by instinct and blind determination, he floated forward—andthrough the Ultimate Gate.

IV.

Randolph Carter’s advance through that Cyclopean bulk of abnormal masonry was like a dizzyprecipitation through the measureless gulfs between the stars. From a great distance he felttriumphant, godlike surges of deadly sweetness, and after that the rustling of great wings,and impressions of sound like the chirpings and murmurings of objects unknown on earth or inthe solar system. Glancing backward, he saw not one gate alone, but a multiplicity of gates,at some of which clamoured Forms he strove not to remember.
And then, suddenly, he felt a greater terror than that which any of the Formscould give—a terror from which he could not flee because it was connected with himself.Even the First Gateway had taken something of stability from him, leaving him uncertain abouthis bodily form and about his relationship to the mistily defined objects around him, but ithad not disturbed his sense of unity. He had still been Randolph Carter, a fixed point in thedimensional seething. Now, beyond the Ultimate Gateway, he realised in a moment of consumingfright that he was not one person, but many persons.
He was in many places at the same time. On earth, on October 7, 1883, a littleboy named Randolph Carter was leaving the Snake-Den in the hushed evening light and runningdown the rocky slope and through the twisted-boughed orchard toward his Uncle Christopher’shouse in the hills beyond Arkham—yet at that same moment, which was also somehow in theearthly year of 1928, a vague shadow not less Randolph Carter was sitting on a pedestal amongthe Ancient Ones in earth’s trans-dimensional extension. Here, too, was a third RandolphCarter in the unknown and formless cosmic abyss beyond the Ultimate Gate. And elsewhere, ina chaos of scenes whose infinite multiplicity and monstrous diversity brought him close to thebrink of madness, were a limitless confusion of beings which he knew were as much himself asthe local manifestation now beyond the Ultimate Gate.
There were “Carters” in settings belonging to every known and suspectedage of earth’s history, and to remoter ages of earthly entity transcending knowledge,suspicion, and credibility. “Carters” of forms both human and non-human, vertebrateand invertebrate, conscious and mindless, animal and vegetable. And more, there were “Carters”having nothing in common with earthly life, but moving outrageously amidst backgrounds of otherplanets and systems and galaxies and cosmic continua. Spores of eternal life drifting fromworld to world, universe to universe, yet all equally himself. Some of the glimpses recalleddreams—both faint and vivid, single and persistent—which he had had through thelong years since he first began to dream, and a few possessed a haunting, fascinating, and almosthorrible familiarity which no earthly logic could explain.
Faced with this realisation, Randolph Carter reeled in the clutch of supremehorror—horror such as had not been hinted even at the climax of that hideous night whentwo had ventured into an ancient and abhorred necropolis under a waning moon and only one hademerged. No death, no doom, no anguish can arouse the surpassing despair which flows from aloss of identity. Merging with nothingness is peaceful oblivion; but to be aware of existenceand yet to know that one is no longer a definite being distinguished from other beings—thatone no longer has a self—that is the nameless summit of agony and dread.
He knew that there had been a Randolph Carter of Boston, yet could not be surewhether he—the fragment or facet of an earthly entity beyond the Ultimate Gate—hadbeen that one or some other. His self had been annihilated; and yet he—if indeedthere could, in view of that utter nullity of individual existence, be such a thing as he—wasequally aware of being in some inconceivable way a legion of selves. It was as though his bodyhad been suddenly transformed into one of those many-limbed and many-headed effigies sculpturedin Indian temples, and he contemplated the aggregation in a bewildered attempt to discern whichwas the original and which the additions—if indeed (supremely monstrous thought) therewere any original as distinguished from other embodiments.
Then, in the midst of these devastating reflections, Carter’s beyond-the-gatefragment was hurled from what had seemed the nadir of horror to black, clutching pits of a horrorstill more profound. This time it was largely external—a force or personality which atonce confronted and surrounded and pervaded him, and which in addition to its local presence,seemed also to be a part of himself, and likewise to be coexistent with all time and coterminouswith all space. There was no visual image, yet the sense of entity and the awful concept ofcombined localism, identity, and infinity lent a paralysing terror beyond anything which anyCarter-fragment had hitherto deemed capable of existing.
In the face of that awful wonder, the quasi-Carter forgot the horror of destroyedindividuality. It was an All-in-One and One-in-All of limitless being and self—not merelya thing of one Space-Time continuum, but allied to the ultimate animating essence of existence’swhole unbounded sweep—the last, utter sweep which has no confines and which outreachesfancy and mathematics alike. It was perhaps that which certain secret cults of earth have whisperedof as YOG-SOTHOTH, and which has been a deity under other names; that which the crustaceansof Yuggoth worship as the Beyond-One, and which the vaporous brains of the spiral nebulae knowby an untranslatable Sign—yet in a flash the Carter-facet realised how slight and fractionalall these conceptions are.
And now the BEING was addressing the Carter-facet in prodigious waves thatsmote and burned and thundered—a concentration of energy that blasted its recipient withwell-nigh unendurable violence, and that followed, with certain definite variations, the singularunearthly rhythm which had marked the chanting and swaying of the Ancient Ones, and the flickeringof the monstrous lights, in that baffling region beyond the First Gate. It was as though sunsand worlds and universes had converged upon one point whose very position in space they hadconspired to annihilate with an impact of resistless fury. But amidst the greater terror onelesser terror was diminished; for the searing waves appeared somehow to isolate the beyond-the-gateCarter from his infinity of duplicates—to restore, as it were, a certain amount of theillusion of identity. After a time the hearer began to translate the waves into speech-formsknown to him, and his sense of horror and oppression waned. Fright became pure awe, and whathad seemed blasphemously abnormal seemed now only ineffably majestic.
“Randolph Carter,” IT seemed to say, “MY manifestations onyour planet’s extension, the Ancient Ones, have sent you as one who would lately havereturned to small lands of dream which he had lost, yet who with greater freedom has risen togreater and nobler desires and curiosities. You wished to sail up golden Oukranos, to searchout forgotten ivory cities in orchid-heavy Kled, and to reign on the opal throne of Ilek-Vad,whose fabulous towers and numberless domes rise mighty toward a single red star in a firmamentalien to your earth and to all matter. Now, with the passing of two Gates, you wish loftierthings. You would not flee like a child from a scene disliked to a dream beloved, but wouldplunge like a man into that last and inmost of secrets which lies behind all scenes and dreams.
“What you wish, I have found good; and I am ready to grant that whichI have granted eleven times only to beings of your planet—five times only to those youcall men, or those resembling them. I am ready to shew you the Ultimate Mystery, to look onwhich is to blast a feeble spirit. Yet before you gaze full at that last and first of secretsyou may still wield a free choice, and return if you will through the two Gates with the Veilstill unrent before your eyes.”

V.

A sudden shutting-off of the waves left Carter in a chilling and awesome silence full of thespirit of desolation. On every hand pressed the illimitable vastness of the void, yet the seekerknew that the BEING was still there. After a moment he thought of words whose mental substancehe flung into the abyss:
“I accept. I will not retreat.”
The waves surged forth again, and Carter knew that the BEING had heard. Andnow there poured from that limitless MIND a flood of knowledge and explanation which openednew vistas to the seeker, and prepared him for such a grasp of the cosmos as he had never hopedto possess. He was told how childish and limited is the notion of a tri-dimensional world, andwhat an infinity of directions there are besides the known directions of up-down, forward-backward,right-left. He was shewn the smallness and tinsel emptiness of the little gods of earth, withtheir petty, human interests and connexions—their hatreds, rages, loves, and vanities;their craving for praise and sacrifice, and their demands for faith contrary to reason and Nature.
While most of the impressions translated themselves to Carter as words, therewere others to which other senses gave interpretation. Perhaps with eyes and perhaps with imaginationhe perceived that he was in a region of dimensions beyond those conceivable to the eye and brainof man. He saw now, in the brooding shadows of that which had been first a vortex of power andthen an illimitable void, a sweep of creation that dizzied his senses. From some inconceivablevantage-point he looked upon prodigious forms whose multiple extensions transcended any conceptionof being, size, and boundaries which his mind had hitherto been able to hold, despite a lifetimeof cryptical study. He began to understand dimly why there could exist at the same time thelittle boy Randolph Carter in the Arkham farmhouse in 1883, the misty form on the vaguely hexagonalpillar beyond the First Gate, the fragment now facing the PRESENCE in the limitless abyss, andall the other “Carters” his fancy or perception envisaged.
Then the waves increased in strength, and sought to improve his understanding,reconciling him to the multiform entity of which his present fragment was an infinitesimal part.They told him that every figure of space is but the result of the intersection by a plane ofsome corresponding figure of one more dimension—as a square is cut from a cube or a circlefrom a sphere. The cube and sphere, of three dimensions, are thus cut from corresponding formsof four dimensions that men know only through guesses and dreams; and these in turn are cutfrom forms of five dimensions, and so on up to the dizzy and reachless heights of archetypalinfinity. The world of men and of the gods of men is merely an infinitesimal phase of an infinitesimalthing—the three-dimensional phase of that small wholeness reached by the First Gate, where’Umr at-Tawil dictates dreams to the Ancient Ones. Though men hail it as reality and brandthoughts of its many-dimensioned original as unreality, it is in truth the very opposite. Thatwhich we call substance and reality is shadow and illusion, and that which we call shadow andillusion is substance and reality.
Time, the waves went on, is motionless, and without beginning or end. Thatit has motion, and is the cause of change, is an illusion. Indeed, it is itself really an illusion,for except to the narrow sight of beings in limited dimensions there are no such things as past,present, and future. Men think of time only because of what they call change, yet that too isillusion. All that was, and is, and is to be, exists simultaneously.
These revelations came with a godlike solemnity which left Carter unable todoubt. Even though they lay almost beyond his comprehension, he felt that they must be truein the light of that final cosmic reality which belies all local perspectives and narrow partialviews; and he was familiar enough with profound speculations to be free from the bondage oflocal and partial conceptions. Had his whole quest not been based upon a faith in the unrealityof the local and partial?
After an impressive pause the waves continued, saying that what the denizensof few-dimensioned zones call change is merely a function of their consciousness, which viewsthe external world from various cosmic angles. As the shapes produced by the cutting of a coneseem to vary with the angles of cutting—being circle, ellipse, parabola, or hyperbolaaccording to that angle, yet without any change in the cone itself—so do the local aspectsof an unchanged and endless reality seem to change with the cosmic angle of regarding. To thisvariety of angles of consciousness the feeble beings of the inner worlds are slaves, since withrare exceptions they cannot learn to control them. Only a few students of forbidden things havegained inklings of this control, and have thereby conquered time and change. But the entitiesoutside the Gates command all angles, and view the myriad parts of the cosmos in terms of fragmentary,change-involving perspective, or of the changeless totality beyond perspective, in accordancewith their will.
As the waves paused again, Carter began to comprehend, vaguely and terrifiedly,the ultimate background of that riddle of lost individuality which had at first so horrifiedhim. His intuition pieced together the fragments of revelation, and brought him closer and closerto a grasp of the secret. He understood that much of the frightful revelation would have comeupon him—splitting up his ego amongst myriads of earthly counterparts—inside theFirst Gate, had not the magic of ’Umr at-Tawil kept it from him in order that he mightuse the Silver Key with precision for the Ultimate Gate’s opening. Anxious for clearerknowledge, he sent out waves of thought, asking more of the exact relationship between his variousfacets—the fragment now beyond the Ultimate Gate, the fragment still on the quasi-hexagonalpedestal beyond the First Gate, the boy of 1883, the man of 1928, the various ancestral beingswho had formed his heritage and the bulwark of his ego, and the nameless denizens of the otheraeons and other worlds which that first hideous flash of ultimate perception had identifiedwith him. Slowly the waves of the BEING surged out in reply, trying to make plain what was almostbeyond the reach of an earthly mind.
All descended lines of beings of the finite dimensions, continued the waves,and all stages of growth in each one of these beings, are merely manifestations of one archetypaland eternal being in the space outside dimensions. Each local being—son, father, grandfather,and so on—and each stage of individual being—infant, child, boy, young man, oldman—is merely one of the infinite phases of that same archetypal and eternal being, causedby a variation in the angle of the consciousness-plane which cuts it. Randolph Carter at allages; Randolph Carter and all his ancestors both human and pre-human, terrestrial and pre-terrestrial;all these were only phases of one ultimate, eternal “Carter” outside space and time—phantomprojections differentiated only by the angle at which the plane of consciousness happened tocut the eternal archetype in each case.
A slight change of angle could turn the student of today into the child ofyesterday; could turn Randolph Carter into that wizard Edmund Carter who fled from Salem tothe hills behind Arkham in 1692, or that Pickman Carter who in the year 2169 would use strangemeans in repelling the Mongol hordes from Australia; could turn a human Carter into one of thoseearlier entities which had dwelt in primal Hyperborea and worshipped black, plastic Tsathogguaafter flying down from Kythanil, the double planet that once revolved around Arcturus; couldturn a terrestrial Carter to a remotely ancestral and doubtfully shaped dweller on Kythanilitself, or a still remoter creature of trans-galactic Shonhi, or a four-dimensioned gaseousconsciousness in an older space-time continuum, or a vegetable brain of the future on a darkradio-active comet of inconceivable orbit—and so on, in the endless cosmic circle.
The archetypes, throbbed the waves, are the people of the ultimate abyss—formless,ineffable, and guessed at only by rare dreamers on the low-dimensioned worlds. Chief among suchwas this informing BEING itself&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. which indeed was Carter’s ownarchetype. The glutless zeal of Carter and all his forbears for forbidden cosmic secretswas a natural result of derivation from the SUPREME ARCHETYPE. On every world all great wizards,all great thinkers, all great artists, are facets of IT.
Almost stunned with awe, and with a kind of terrifying delight, Randolph Carter’sconsciousness did homage to that transcendent ENTITY from which it was derived. As the wavespaused again he pondered in the mighty silence, thinking of strange tributes, stranger questions,and still stranger requests. Curious concepts flowed conflictingly through a brain dazed withunaccustomed vistas and unforeseen disclosures. It occurred to him that, if those disclosureswere literally true, he might bodily visit all those infinitely distant ages and partsof the universe which he had hitherto known only in dreams, could he but command the magic tochange the angle of his consciousness-plane. And did not the Silver Key supply that magic? Hadit not first changed him from a man in 1928 to a boy in 1883, and then to something quite outsidetime? Oddly, despite his present apparent absence of body, he knew that the Key was still withhim.
While the silence still lasted, Randolph Carter radiated forth the thoughtsand questions which assailed him. He knew that in this ultimate abyss he was equidistant fromevery facet of his archetype—human or non-human, earthly or extra-earthly, galactic ortrans-galactic; and his curiosity regarding the other phases of his being—especially thosephases which were farthest from an earthly 1928 in time and space, or which had most persistentlyhaunted his dreams throughout life—was at fever heat. He felt that his archetypal ENTITYcould at will send him bodily to any of these phases of bygone and distant life by changinghis consciousness-plane, and despite the marvels he had undergone he burned for the furthermarvel of walking in the flesh through those grotesque and incredible scenes which visionsof the night had fragmentarily brought him.
Without definite intention he was asking the PRESENCE for access to a dim,fantastic world whose five multi-coloured suns, alien constellations, dizzy black crags, clawed,tapir-snouted denizens, bizarre metal towers, unexplained tunnels, and cryptical floating cylindershad intruded again and again upon his slumbers. That world, he felt vaguely, was in all theconceivable cosmos the one most freely in touch with others; and he longed to explore the vistaswhose beginnings he had glimpsed, and to embark through space to those still remoter worldswith which the clawed, snouted denizens trafficked. There was no time for fear. As at all crisesof his strange life, sheer cosmic curiosity triumphed over everything else.
When the waves resumed their awesome pulsing Carter knew that his terriblerequest was granted. The BEING was telling him of the nighted gulfs through which he would haveto pass, of the unknown quintuple star in an unsuspected galaxy around which the alien worldrevolved, and of the burrowing inner horrors against which the clawed, snouted race of thatworld perpetually fought. IT told him, too, of how the angle of his personal consciousness-plane,and the angle of his consciousness-plane regarding the space-time elements of the sought-forworld, would have to be tilted simultaneously in order to restore to that world the Carter-facetwhich had dwelt there.
The PRESENCE warned him to be sure of his symbols if he wished ever to returnfrom the remote and alien world he had chosen, and he radiated back an impatient affirmation;confident that the Silver Key, which he felt was with him and which he knew had tilted bothworld and personal planes in throwing him back to 1883, contained those symbols which were meant.And now the BEING, grasping his impatience, signified Its readiness to accomplish the monstrousprecipitation. The waves abruptly ceased, and there supervened a momentary stillness tense withnameless and dreadful expectancy.
Then, without warning, came a whirring and drumming that swelled to a terrificthundering. Once again Carter felt himself the focal point of an intense concentration of energywhich smote and hammered and seared unbearably in the now-familiar alien rhythm of outer space,and which he could not classify as either the blasting heat of a blazing star or the all-petrifyingcold of the ultimate abyss. Bands and rays of colour utterly foreign to any spectrum of ouruniverse played and wove and interlaced before him, and he was conscious of a frightful velocityof motion. He caught one fleeting glimpse of a figure sitting alone upon a cloudy thronemore hexagonal than otherwise.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

VI.

As the Hindoo paused in his story he saw that de Marigny and Phillips were watching him absorbedly.Aspinwall pretended to ignore the narrative, and kept his eyes ostentatiously on the papersbefore him. The alien-rhythmed ticking of the coffin-shaped clock took on a new and portentousmeaning, while the fumes from the choked, neglected tripods wove themselves into fantastic andinexplicable shapes, and formed disturbing combinations with the grotesque figures of thedraught-swayed tapestries. The old negro who had tended them was gone—perhaps some growingtension had frightened him out of the house. An almost apologetic hesitancy hampered the speakeras he resumed in his oddly laboured yet idiomatic voice.
“You have found these things of the abyss hard to believe,” hesaid, “but you will find the tangible and material things ahead still harder. That isthe way of our minds. Marvels are doubly incredible when brought into three dimensions fromthe vague regions of possible dream. I shall not try to tell you much—that would be anotherand very different story. I will tell only what you absolutely have to know.”
Carter, after that final vortex of alien and polychromatic rhythm, had foundhimself in what for a moment he thought was his old insistent dream. He was, as many a nightbefore, walking amidst throngs of clawed, snouted beings through the streets of a labyrinthof inexplicably fashioned metal under a blaze of diverse solar colour; and as he looked downhe saw that his body was like those of the others—rugose, partly squamous, and curiouslyarticulated in a fashion mainly insect-like yet not without a caricaturish resemblance to thehuman outline. The Silver Key was still in his grasp—though held by a noxious-lookingclaw.
In another moment the dream-sense vanished, and he felt rather as one justawaked from a dream. The ultimate abyss—the BEING—an entity of absurd, outlandishrace called “Randolph Carter” on a world of the future not yet born—some ofthese things were parts of the persistent, recurrent dreams of the wizard Zkauba on the planetYaddith. They were too persistent—they interfered with his duties in weaving spells tokeep the frightful bholes in their burrows, and became mixed up with his recollections of themyriad real worlds he had visited in his light-beam envelope. And now they had become quasi-realas never before. This heavy, material Silver Key in his right upper claw, exact image of onehe had dreamt about, meant no good. He must rest and reflect, and consult the Tablets of Nhingfor advice on what to do. Climbing a metal wall in a lane off the main concourse, he enteredhis apartment and approached the rack of tablets.
Seven day-fractions later Zkauba squatted on his prism in awe and half-despair,for the truth had opened up a new and conflicting set of memories. Nevermore could he know thepeace of being one entity. For all time and space he was two: Zkauba the Wizard of Yaddith,disgusted with the thought of the repellent earth-mammal Carter that he was to be and had been,and Randolph Carter, of Boston on the earth, shivering with fright at the clawed, snouted thingwhich he had once been, and had become again.
The time-units spent on Yaddith, croaked the Swami—whose laboured voicewas beginning to shew signs of fatigue—made a tale in themselves which could not be relatedin brief compass. There were trips to Shonhi and Mthura and Kath, and other worlds in the twenty-eightgalaxies accessible to the light-beam envelopes of the creatures of Yaddith, and trips backand forth through aeons of time with the aid of the Silver Key and various other symbols knownto Yaddith’s wizards. There were hideous struggles with the bleached, viscous bholes inthe primal tunnels that honeycombed the planet. There were awed sessions in libraries amongstthe massed lore of ten thousand worlds living and dead. There were tense conferences with otherminds of Yaddith, including that of the Arch-Ancient Buo. Zkauba told no one of what had befallenhis personality, but when the Randolph Carter facet was uppermost he would study furiously everypossible means of returning to the earth and to human form, and would desperately practice humanspeech with the buzzing, alien throat-organs so ill adapted to it.
The Carter-facet had soon learned with horror that the Silver Key was unableto effect his return to human form. It was, as he deduced too late from things he remembered,things he dreamed, and things he inferred from the lore of Yaddith, a product of Hyperboreaon earth; with power over the personal consciousness-angles of human beings alone. It could,however, change the planetary angle and send the user at will through time in an unchangedbody. There had been an added spell which gave it limitless powers it otherwise lacked; butthis, too, was a human discovery—peculiar to a spatially unreachable region, and not tobe duplicated by the wizards of Yaddith. It had been written on the undecipherable parchmentin the hideously carven box with the Silver Key, and Carter bitterly lamented that he had leftit behind. The now inaccessible BEING of the abyss had warned him to be sure of his symbols,and had doubtless thought he lacked nothing.
As time wore on he strove harder and harder to utilise the monstrous loreof Yaddith in finding a way back to the abyss and the omnipotent ENTITY. With his new knowledgehe could have done much toward reading the cryptic parchment; but that power, under presentconditions, was merely ironic. There were times, however, when the Zkauba-facet was uppermost,and when he strove to erase the conflicting Carter-memories which troubled him.
Thus long spaces of time wore on—ages longer than the brain of man couldgrasp, since the beings of Yaddith die only after prolonged cycles. After many hundred revolutionsthe Carter-facet seemed to gain on the Zkauba-facet, and would spend vast periods calculatingthe distance of Yaddith in space and time from the human earth that was to be. The figures werestaggering—aeons of light-years beyond counting—but the immemorial lore of Yaddithfitted Carter to grasp such things. He cultivated the power of dreaming himself momentarilyearthward, and learned many things about our planet that he had never known before. But he couldnot dream the needed formula on the missing parchment.
Then at last he conceived a wild plan of escape from Yaddith—which beganwhen he found a drug that would keep his Zkauba-facet always dormant, yet without dissolutionof the knowledge and memories of Zkauba. He thought that his calculations would let him performa voyage with a light-wave envelope such as no being of Yaddith had ever performed—abodily voyage through nameless aeons and across incredible galactic reaches to the solarsystem and the earth itself. Once on earth, though in the body of a clawed, snouted thing, hemight be able somehow to find—and finish deciphering—the strangely hieroglyphedparchment he had left in the car at Arkham; and with its aid—and the Key’s—resumehis normal terrestrial semblance.
He was not blind to the perils of the attempt. He knew that when he had broughtthe planet-angle to the right aeon (a thing impossible to do while hurtling through space),Yaddith would be a dead world dominated by triumphant bholes, and that his escape in the light-waveenvelope would be a matter of grave doubt. Likewise was he aware of how he must achieve suspendedanimation, in the manner of an adept, to endure the aeon-long flight through fathomless abysses.He knew, too, that—assuming his voyage succeeded—he must immunise himself to thebacterial and other earthly conditions hostile to a body from Yaddith. Furthermore, he mustprovide a way of feigning human shape on earth until he might recover and decipher the parchmentand resume that shape in truth. Otherwise he would probably be discovered and destroyed bythe people in horror as a thing that should not be. And there must be some gold—luckilyobtainable on Yaddith—to tide him over that period of quest.
Slowly Carter’s plans went forward. He provided a light-wave envelopeof abnormal toughness, able to stand both the prodigious time-transition and the unexampledflight through space. He tested all his calculations, and sent forth his earthward dreams againand again, bringing them as close as possible to 1928. He practiced suspended animation withmarvellous success. He discovered just the bacterial agent he needed, and worked out the varyinggravity-stress to which he must become used. He artfully fashioned a waxen mask and loose costumeenabling him to pass among men as a human being of a sort, and devised a doubly potent spellwith which to hold back the bholes at the moment of his starting from the black, dead Yaddithof the inconceivable future. He took care, too, to assemble a large supply of the drugs—unobtainableon earth—which would keep his Zkauba-facet in abeyance till he might shed the Yaddithbody, nor did he neglect a small store of gold for earthly use.
The starting-day was a time of doubt and apprehension. Carter climbed up tohis envelope-platform, on the pretext of sailing for the triple star Nython, and crawled intothe sheath of shining metal. He had just room to perform the ritual of the Silver Key, and ashe did so he slowly started the levitation of his envelope. There was an appalling seethingand darkening of the day, and a hideous racking of pain. The cosmos seemed to reel irresponsibly,and the other constellations danced in a black sky.
All at once Carter felt a new equilibrium. The cold of interstellar gulfs gnawedat the outside of his envelope, and he could see that he floated free in space—the metalbuilding from which he had started having decayed ages before. Below him the ground was festeringwith gigantic bholes; and even as he looked, one reared up several hundred feet and levelleda bleached, viscous end at him. But his spells were effective, and in another moment he wasfalling away from Yaddith unharmed.

VII.

In that bizarre room in New Orleans, from which the old black servant had instinctively fled,the odd voice of Swami Chandraputra grew hoarser still.
“Gentlemen,” he continued, “I will not ask you to believethese things until I have shewn you special proof. Accept it, then, as a myth, when I tell youof the thousands of light-years—thousands of years of time, and uncounted billionsof miles—that Randolph Carter hurtled through space as a nameless, alien entity ina thin envelope of electron-activated metal. He timed his period of suspended animation withutmost care, planning to have it end only a few years before the time of landing on the earthin or near 1928.
“He will never forget that awakening. Remember, gentlemen, that beforethat aeon-long sleep he had lived consciously for thousands of terrestrial years amidst thealien and horrible wonders of Yaddith. There was a hideous gnawing of cold, a cessationof menacing dreams, and a glance through the eye-plates of the envelope. Stars, clusters, nebulae,on every hand—and at last their outlines bore some kinship to the constellations ofearth that he knew.
“Some day his descent into the solar system may be told. He saw Kynarthand Yuggoth on the rim, passed close to Neptune and glimpsed the hellish white fungi that spotit, learned an untellable secret from the close-glimpsed mists of Jupiter and saw the horroron one of the satellites, and gazed at the Cyclopean ruins that sprawl over Mars’ ruddydisc. When the earth drew near he saw it as a thin crescent which swelled alarmingly in size.He slackened speed, though his sensations of homecoming made him wish to lose not a moment.I will not try to tell you of those sensations as I learned them from Carter.
“Well, toward the last Carter hovered about in the earth’s upperair waiting till daylight came over the western hemisphere. He wanted to land where he had left—nearthe Snake-Den in the hills behind Arkham. If any of you have been away from home long—andI know one of you has—I leave it to you how the sight of New England’s rolling hillsand great elms and gnarled orchards and ancient stone walls must have affected him.
“He came down at dawn in the lower meadow of the old Carter place, andwas thankful for the silence and solitude. It was autumn, as when he had left, and the smellof the hills was balm to his soul. He managed to drag the metal envelope up the slope of thetimber-lot into the Snake-Den, though it would not go through the weed-choked fissure to theinner cave. It was there also that he covered his alien body with the human clothing and waxenmask which would be necessary. He kept the envelope here for over a year, till certain circumstancesmade a new hiding-place necessary.
“He walked to Arkham—incidentally practicing the management ofhis body in human posture and against terrestrial gravity—and got his gold changed tomoney at a bank. He also made some inquiries—posing as a foreigner ignorant of much English—andfound that the year was 1930, only two years after the goal he had aimed at.
“Of course, his position was horrible. Unable to assert his identity,forced to live on guard every moment, with certain difficulties regarding food, and with a needto conserve the alien drug which kept his Zkauba-facet dormant, he felt that he must act asquickly as possible. Going to Boston and taking a room in the decaying West End, where he couldlive cheaply and inconspicuously, he at once established inquiries concerning Randolph Carter’sestate and effects. It was then that he learned how anxious Mr. Aspinwall, here, was to havethe estate divided, and how valiantly Mr. de Marigny and Mr. Phillips strove to keep it intact.”
The Hindoo bowed, though no expression crossed his dark, tranquil, and thicklybearded face.
“Indirectly,” he continued, “Carter secured a good copy ofthe missing parchment and began work on its deciphering. I am glad to say that I was able tohelp in all this—for he appealed to me quite early, and through me came in touch withother mystics throughout the world. I went to live with him in Boston—a wretched placein Chambers St. As for the parchment—I am pleased to help Mr. de Marigny in his perplexity.To him let me say that the language of those hieroglyphics is not Naacal but R’lyehian,which was brought to earth by the spawn of Cthulhu countless cycles ago. It is, of course, atranslation—there was an Hyperborean original millions of years earlier in the primaltongue of Tsath-yo.
“There was more to decipher than Carter had looked for, but at no timedid he give up hope. Early this year he made great strides through a book he imported from Nepal,and there is no question but that he will win before long. Unfortunately, however, one handicaphas developed—the exhaustion of the alien drug which keeps the Zkauba-facet dormant. Thisis not, however, as great a calamity as was feared. Carter’s personality is gaining inthe body, and when Zkauba comes uppermost—for shorter and shorter periods, and now onlywhen evoked by some unusual excitement—he is generally too dazed to undo any of Carter’swork. He cannot find the metal envelope that would take him back to Yaddith, for although healmost did, once, Carter hid it anew at a time when the Zkauba-facet was wholly latent. Allthe harm he has done is to frighten a few people and create certain nightmare rumours amongthe Poles and Lithuanians of Boston’s West End. So far, he has never injured the carefuldisguise prepared by the Carter-facet, though he sometimes throws it off so that parts haveto be replaced. I have seen what lies beneath—and it is not good to see.
“A month ago Carter saw the advertisement of this meeting, and knew thathe must act quickly to save his estate. He could not wait to decipher the parchment and resumehis human form. Consequently he deputed me to act for him, and in that capacity I am here.
“Gentlemen, I say to you that Randolph Carter is not dead; that he istemporarily in an anomalous condition, but that within two or three months at the outside hewill be able to appear in proper form and demand the custody of his estate. I am prepared tooffer proof if necessary. Therefore I beg that you adjourn this meeting for an indefinite period.”

VIII.

De Marigny and Phillips stared at the Hindoo as if hypnotised, while Aspinwall emitted a seriesof snorts and bellows. The old attorney’s disgust had by now surged into open rage, andhe pounded the table with an apoplectically veined fist. When he spoke, it was in a kind ofbark.
“How long is this foolery to be borne? I’ve listened an hour tothis madman—this faker—and now he has the damned effrontery to say that RandolphCarter is alive—to ask us to postpone the settlement for no good reason! Why don’tyou throw the scoundrel out, de Marigny? Do you mean to make us all the butts of a charlatanor idiot?”
De Marigny quietly raised his hands and spoke softly.
“Let us think slowly and clearly. This has been a very singular tale,and there are things in it which I, as a mystic not altogether ignorant, recognise as far fromimpossible. Furthermore—since 1930 I have received letters from the Swami which tallywith his account.”
As he paused, old Mr. Phillips ventured a word.
“Swami Chandraputra spoke of proofs. I, too, recognise much that is significantin this story, and I have myself had many oddly corroborative letters from the Swami duringthe last two years; but some of these statements are very extreme. Is there not something tangiblewhich can be shewn?”
At last the impassive-faced Swami replied, slowly and hoarsely, and drawingan object from the pocket of his loose coat as he spoke.
“While none of you here has ever seen the Silver Key itself, Messrs.de Marigny and Phillips have seen photographs of it. Does this look familiar to you?”
He fumblingly laid on the table, with his large, white-mittened hand, a heavykey of tarnished silver—nearly five inches long, of unknown and utterly exotic workmanship,and covered from end to end with hieroglyphs of the most bizarre description. De Marigny andPhillips gasped.
“That’s it!” cried de Marigny. “The camera doesn’tlie. I couldn’t be mistaken!”
But Aspinwall had already launched a reply.
“Fools! What does it prove? If that’s really the key that belongedto my cousin, it’s up to this foreigner—this damned nigger—to explain howhe got it! Randolph Carter vanished with the key four years ago. How do we know he wasn’trobbed and murdered? He was half-crazy himself, and in touch with still crazier people.
“Look here, you nigger—where did you get that key? Did you killRandolph Carter?”
The Swami’s features, abnormally placid, did not change; but the remote,irisless black eyes behind them blazed dangerously. He spoke with great difficulty.
“Please control yourself, Mr. Aspinwall. There is another form of proofthat I could give, but its effect upon everybody would not be pleasant. Let us be reasonable.Here are some papers obviously written since 1930, and in the unmistakable style of RandolphCarter.”
He clumsily drew a long envelope from inside his loose coat and handed it tothe sputtering attorney as de Marigny and Phillips watched with chaotic thoughts and a dawningfeeling of supernal wonder.
“Of course the handwriting is almost illegible—but remember thatRandolph Carter now has no hands well adapted to forming human script.”
Aspinwall looked through the papers hurriedly, and was visibly perplexed, buthe did not change his demeanour. The room was tense with excitement and nameless dread, andthe alien rhythm of the coffin-shaped clock had an utterly diabolic sound to de Marigny andPhillips—though the lawyer seemed affected not at all. Aspinwall spoke again.
“These look like clever forgeries. If they aren’t, they may meanthat Randolph Carter has been brought under the control of people with no good purpose. There’sonly one thing to do—have this faker arrested. De Marigny, will you telephone for thepolice?”
“Let us wait,” answered their host. “I do not think thiscase calls for the police. I have a certain idea. Mr. Aspinwall, this gentleman is a mysticof real attainments. He says he is in the confidence of Randolph Carter. Will it satisfy youif he can answer certain questions which could be answered only by one in such confidence? Iknow Carter, and can ask such questions. Let me get a book which I think will make a good test.”
He turned toward the door to the library, Phillips dazedly following in akind of automatic way. Aspinwall remained where he was, studying closely the Hindoo who confrontedhim with abnormally impassive face. Suddenly, as Chandraputra clumsily restored the SilverKey to his pocket, the lawyer emitted a guttural shout which stopped de Marigny and Phillipsin their tracks.
“Hey, by God, I’ve got it! This rascal is in disguise. I don’tbelieve he’s an East Indian at all. That face—it isn’t a face, but a mask!I guess his story put that into my head, but it’s true. It never moves, and that turbanand beard hide the edges. This fellow’s a common crook! He isn’t even a foreigner—I’vebeen watching his language. He’s a Yankee of some sort. And look at those mittens—heknows his fingerprints could be spotted. Damn you, I’ll pull that thing off—”
“Stop!” The hoarse, oddly alien voice of the Swami held a tonebeyond all mere earthly fright. “I told you there was another form of proof which Icould give if necessary, and I warned you not to provoke me to it. This red-faced old meddleris right—I’m not really an East Indian. This face is a mask, and what it coversis not human. You others have guessed—I felt that minutes ago. It wouldn’t bepleasant if I took that mask off—let it alone, Ernest. I may as well tell you that I am Randolph Carter.”
No one moved. Aspinwall snorted and made vague motions. De Marigny and Phillips,across the room, watched the workings of his red face and studied the back of the turbaned figurethat confronted him. The clock’s abnormal ticking was hideous, and the tripod fumes andswaying arras danced a dance of death. The half-choking lawyer broke the silence.
“No you don’t, you crook—you can’t scare me! You’vereasons of your own for not wanting that mask off. Maybe we’d know who you are. Off withit—”
As he reached forward, the Swami seized his hand with one of his own clumsilymittened members, evoking a curious cry of mixed pain and surprise. De Marigny started towardthe two, but paused confused as the pseudo-Hindoo’s shout of protest changed to a whollyinexplicable rattling and buzzing sound. Aspinwall’s red face was furious, and with hisfree hand he made another lunge at his opponent’s bushy beard. This time he succeededin getting a hold, and at his frantic tug the whole waxen visage came loose from the turbanand clung to the lawyer’s apoplectic fist.
As it did so, Aspinwall uttered a frightful gurgling cry, and Phillips andde Marigny saw his face convulsed with a wilder, deeper, and more hideous epilepsy of starkpanic than ever they had seen on human countenance before. The pseudo-Swami had meanwhile releasedhis other hand and was standing as if dazed, making buzzing noises of a most abnormal quality.Then the turbaned figure slumped oddly into a posture scarcely human, and began a curious, fascinatedsort of shuffle toward the coffin-shaped clock that ticked out its cosmic and abnormal rhythm.His now uncovered face was turned away, and de Marigny and Phillips could not see what thelawyer’s act had disclosed. Then their attention was turned to Aspinwall, who was sinkingponderously to the floor. The spell was broken—but when they reached the old man he wasdead.
Turning quickly to the shuffling Swami’s receding back, de Marigny sawone of the great white mittens drop listlessly off a dangling arm. The fumes of the olibanumwere thick, and all that could be glimpsed of the revealed hand was something long and black.Before the Creole could reach the retreating figure, old Mr. Phillips laid a restraining handon his shoulder.
“Don’t!” he whispered. “We don’t know what we’reup against—that other facet, you know—Zkauba, the wizard of Yaddith.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
The turbaned figure had now reached the abnormal clock, and the watchers sawthrough the dense fumes a blurred black claw fumbling with the tall, hieroglyphed door. Thefumbling made a queer clicking sound. Then the figure entered the coffin-shaped case and pulledthe door shut after it.
De Marigny could no longer be restrained, but when he reached and opened theclock it was empty. The abnormal ticking went on, beating out the dark cosmic rhythm which underliesall mystical gate-openings. On the floor the great white mitten, and the dead man with a beardedmask clutched in his hand, had nothing further to reveal.
A year has passed, and nothing has been heard of Randolph Carter. His estate is still unsettled.The Boston address from which one “Swami Chandraputra” sent inquiries to variousmystics in 1930–31–32 was indeed tenanted by a strange Hindoo, but he left shortlybefore the date of the New Orleans conference and has never been seen since. He was said tobe dark, expressionless, and bearded, and his landlord thinks the swarthy mask—which wasduly exhibited—looks very much like him. He was never, however, suspected of any connexionwith the nightmare apparitions whispered of by local Slavs. The hills behind Arkham were searchedfor the “metal envelope”, but nothing of the sort was ever found. However, a clerkin Arkham’s First National Bank does recall a queer turbaned man who cashed an odd bitof gold bullion in October, 1930.
De Marigny and Phillips scarcely know what to make of the business. Afterall, what was proved? There was a story. There was a key which might have been forged from oneof the pictures Carter had freely distributed in 1928. There were papers—all indecisive.There was a masked stranger, but who now living saw behind the mask? Amidst the strain and theolibanum fumes that act of vanishing in the clock might easily have been a dual hallucination.Hindoos know much of hypnotism. Reason proclaims the “Swami” a criminal with designson Randolph Carter’s estate. But the autopsy said that Aspinwall had died of shock. Wasit rage alone which caused it? And some things in that story&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
In a vast room hung with strangely figured arras and filled with olibanum fumes,Etienne-Laurent de Marigny often sits listening with vague sensations to the abnormal rhythmof that hieroglyphed, coffin-shaped clock.
