Not all of the few remaining inhabitants of Daalbergen, that dismal little village in the RamapoMountains, believe that my uncle, old Dominie Vanderhoof, is really dead. Some of them believehe is suspended somewhere between heaven and hell because of the old sexton’s curse. Ifit had not been for that old magician, he might still be preaching in the little damp churchacross the moor.
After what has happened to me in Daalbergen, I can almost share the opinionof the villagers. I am not sure that my uncle is dead, but I am very sure that he is not aliveupon this earth. There is no doubt that the old sexton buried him once, but he is not in thatgrave now. I can almost feel him behind me as I write, impelling me to tell the truth aboutthose strange happenings in Daalbergen so many years ago.
It was the fourth day of October when I arrived at Daalbergen in answer toa summons. The letter was from a former member of my uncle’s congregation, who wrote that theold man had passed away and that there should be some small estate which I, as his only livingrelative, might inherit. Having reached the secluded little hamlet by a wearying series of changeson branch railways, I found my way to the grocery store of Mark Haines, writer of the letter,and he, leading me into a stuffy back room, told me a peculiar tale concerning Dominie Vanderhoof’sdeath.
“Y’ should be careful, Hoffman,” Haines told me, “wheny’ meet that old sexton, Abel Foster. He’s in league with the devil, sure’syou’re alive. ’Twa’n’t two weeks ago Sam Pryor, when he passed the oldgraveyard, heared him mumblin ’t’ the dead there. ’Twa’n’t righthe should talk that way—an’ Sam does vow that there was a voice answered him—akind o’ half-voice, hollow and muffled-like, as though it come out o’ th’ground. There’s others, too, as could tell y’ about seein’ him standin’afore old Dominie Slott’s grave—that one right agin’ the church wall—a-wringin’his hands an’ a-talkin’ t’ th’ moss on th’ tombstone as thoughit was the old Dominie himself.”
Old Foster, Haines said, had come to Daalbergen about ten years before, andhad been immediately engaged by Vanderhoof to take care of the damp stone church at which mostof the villagers worshipped. No one but Vanderhoof seemed to like him, for his presence broughta suggestion almost of the uncanny. He would sometimes stand by the door when the people cameto church, and the men would coldly return his servile bow while the women brushed past in haste,holding their skirts aside to avoid touching him. He could be seen on week days cutting the grassin the cemetery and tending the flowers around the graves, now and then crooning and mutteringto himself. And few failed to notice the particular attention he paid to the grave of the ReverendGuilliam Slott, first pastor of the church in 1701.
It was not long after Foster’s establishment as a village fixture thatdisaster began to lower. First came the failure of the mountain mine where most of the men worked.The vein of iron had given out, and many of the people moved away to better localities, whilethose who had large holdings of land in the vicinity took to farming and managed to wrest ameager living from the rocky hillsides. Then came the disturbances in the church. It was whisperedabout that the Reverend Johannes Vanderhoof had made a compact with the devil, and was preachinghis word in the house of God. His sermons had become weird and grotesque—redolent withsinister things which the ignorant people of Daalbergen did not understand. He transported themback over ages of fear and superstition to regions of hideous, unseen spirits, and peopled theirfancy with night-haunting ghouls. One by one the congregation dwindled, while the elders anddeacons vainly pleaded with Vanderhoof to change the subject of his sermons. Though the oldman continually promised to comply, he seemed to be enthralled by some higher power which forced himto do its will.
A giant in stature, Johannes Vanderhoof was known to be weak and timid at heart,yet even when threatened with expulsion he continued his eerie sermons, until scarcely a handfulof people remained to listen to him on Sunday morning. Because of weak finances, it was found impossibleto call a new pastor, and before long not one of the villagers dared venture near the churchor the parsonage which adjoined it. Everywhere there was fear of those spectral wraiths withwhom Vanderhoof was apparently in league.
My uncle, Mark Haines told me, had continued to live in the parsonage becausethere was no one with sufficient courage to tell him to move out of it. No one ever saw himagain, but lights were visible in the parsonage at night, and were even glimpsed in the churchfrom time to time. It was whispered about the town that Vanderhoof preached regularly in thechurch every Sunday morning, unaware that his congregation was no longer there to listen. Hehad only the old sexton, who lived in the basement of the church, to take care of him, and Fostermade a weekly visit to what remained of the business section of the village to buy provisions.He no longer bowed servilely to everyone he met, but instead seemed to harbor a demoniac andill-concealed hatred. He spoke to no one except as was necessary to make his purchases, andglanced from left to right out of evil-filled eyes as he walked the street with his cane tappingthe uneven pavements. Bent and shriveled with extreme age, his presence could actually be feltby anyone near him, so powerful was that personality which, said the townspeople, had made Vanderhoofaccept the devil as his master. No person in Daalbergen doubted that Abel Foster was at thebottom of all the town’s ill luck, but not a one dared lift a finger against him, or couldeven approach him without a tremor of fear. His name, as well as Vanderhoof’s, was nevermentioned aloud. Whenever the matter of the church across the moor was discussed, it was inwhispers; and if the conversation chanced to be nocturnal, the whisperers would keep glancingover their shoulders to make sure that nothing shapeless or sinister crept out of the darknessto bear witness to their words.
The churchyard continued to be kept just as green and beautiful as when thechurch was in use, and the flowers near the graves in the cemetery were tended just as carefullyas in times gone by. The old sexton could occasionally be seen working there, as if still beingpaid for his services, and those who dared venture near said that he maintained a continualconversation with the devil and with those spirits which lurked within the graveyard walls.
One morning, Haines went on to say, Foster was seen digging a grave where thesteeple of the church throws its shadow in the afternoon, before the sun goes down behind themountain and puts the entire village in semi-twilight. Later, the church bell, silent for months,tolled solemnly for a half-hour. And at sundown those who were watching from a distance sawFoster bring a coffin from the parsonage on a wheelbarrow, dump it into the grave with slenderceremony, and replace the earth in the hole.
The sexton came to the village the next morning, ahead of his usual weeklyschedule, and in much better spirits than was customary. He seemed willing to talk, remarkingthat Vanderhoof had died the day before, and that he had buried his body beside that of DominieSlott near the church wall. He smiled from time to time, and rubbed his hands in an untimelyand unaccountable glee. It was apparent that he took a perverse and diabolic delight in Vanderhoof’sdeath. The villagers were conscious of an added uncanniness in his presence, and avoided himas much as they could. With Vanderhoof gone they felt more insecure than ever, for the old sextonwas now free to cast his worst spells over the town from the church across the moor. Mutteringsomething in a tongue which no one understood, Foster made his way back along the road overthe swamp.
It was then, it seems, that Mark Haines remembered having heard Dominie Vanderhoofspeak of me as his nephew. Haines accordingly sent for me, in the hope that I might know somethingwhich would clear up the mystery of my uncle’s last years. I assured my summoner, however,that I knew nothing about my uncle or his past, except that my mother had mentioned him as aman of gigantic physique but with little courage or power of will.
Having heard all that Haines had to tell me, I lowered the front legs of mychair to the floor and looked at my watch. It was late afternoon.
“How far is it out to the church?” I inquired. “Think I canmake it before sunset?”
“Sure, lad, y’ ain’t goin’ out there t’night! Nott’ that place!” The old man trembled noticeably in every limb and half rose from hischair, stretching out a lean, detaining hand. “Why, it’s plumb foolishness!”he exclaimed.
I laughed aside his fears and informed him that, come what may, I was determinedto see the old sexton that evening and get the whole matter over as soon as possible. I didnot intend to accept the superstitions of ignorant country folk as truth, for I was convincedthat all I had just heard was merely a chain of events which the over-imaginative people ofDaalbergen had happened to link with their ill-luck. I felt no sense of fear or horror whatever.
Seeing that I was determined to reach my uncle’s house before nightfall,Haines ushered me out of his office and reluctantly gave me the few required directions, pleadingfrom time to time that I change my mind. He shook my hand when I left, as though he never expectedto see me again.
“Take keer that old devil, Foster, don’t git ye!” he warned,again and again. “I wouldn’t go near him after dark fer love n’r money. No siree!”He re-entered his store, solemnly shaking his head, while I set out along a road leading tothe outskirts of the town.
I had walked barely two minutes before I sighted the moor of which Haines hadspoken. The road, flanked by a whitewashed fence, passed over the great swamp, which was overgrownwith clumps of underbrush dipping down into the dank, slimy ooze. An odor of deadness and decayfilled the air, and even in the sunlit afternoon little wisps of vapor could be seen risingfrom the unhealthful spot.
On the opposite side of the moor I turned sharply to the left, as I had beendirected, branching from the main road. There were several houses in the vicinity, I noticed;houses which were scarcely more than huts, reflecting the extreme poverty of their owners. Theroad here passed under the drooping branches of enormous willows which almost completely shutout the rays of the sun. The miasmal odor of the swamp was still in my nostrils, and the airwas damp and chilly. I hurried my pace to get out of that dismal tunnel as soon as possible.
Presently I found myself in the light again. The sun, now hanging like a redball upon the crest of the mountain, was beginning to dip low, and there, some distance aheadof me, bathed in its bloody iridescence, stood the lonely church. I began to sense that uncanninesswhich Haines had mentioned; that feeling of dread which made all Daalbergen shun the place.The squat, stone hulk of the church itself, with its blunt steeple, seemed like an idol to whichthe tombstones that surrounded it bowed down and worshipped, each with an arched top like theshoulders of a kneeling person, while over the whole assemblage the dingy, gray parsonage hoveredlike a wraith.
I had slowed my pace a trifle as I took in the scene. The sun was disappearingbehind the mountain very rapidly now, and the damp air chilled me. Turning my coat collar upabout my neck, I plodded on. Something caught my eye as I glanced up again. In the shadow ofthe church wall was something white—a thing which seemed to have no definite shape. Strainingmy eyes as I came nearer, I saw that it was a cross of new timber, surmounting a mound of freshlyturned earth. The discovery sent a new chill through me. I realized that this must be my uncle’sgrave, but something told me that it was not like the other graves near it. It did not seemlike a dead grave. In some intangible way it appeared to be living, if a gravecan be said to live. Very close to it, I saw as I came nearer, was another grave; an old moundwith a crumbling stone about it. Dominie Slott’s tomb, I thought, remembering Haines’sstory.
There was no sign of life anywhere about the place. In the semi-twilight Iclimbed the low knoll upon which the parsonage stood, and hammered upon the door. There wasno answer. I skirted the house and peered into the windows. The whole place seemed deserted.
The lowering mountains had made night fall with disarming suddenness the minutethe sun was fully hidden. I realized that I could see scarcely more than a few feet ahead ofme. Feeling my way carefully, I rounded a corner of the house and paused, wondering what todo next.
Everything was quiet. There was not a breath of wind, nor were there even theusual noises made by animals in their nocturnal ramblings. All dread had been forgotten fora time, but in the presence of that sepulchral calm my apprehensions returned. I imagined theair peopled with ghastly spirits that pressed around me, making the air almost unbreathable.I wondered, for the hundredth time, where the old sexton might be.
As I stood there, half expecting some sinister demon to creep from the shadows,I noticed two lighted windows glaring from the belfry of the church. I then remembered whatHaines had told me about Foster’s living in the basement of the building. Advancing cautiouslythrough the blackness, I found a side door of the church ajar.
The interior had a musty and mildewed odor. Everything I touched was coveredwith a cold, clammy moisture. I struck a match and began to explore, to discover, if I could,how to get into the belfry. Suddenly I stopped in my tracks.
A snatch of song, loud and obscene, sung in a voice that was guttural and thickwith drink, came from above me. The match burned my fingers, and I dropped it. Two pin-pointsof light pierced the darkness of the farther wall of the church, and below them, to one side,I could see a door outlined where light filtered through its cracks. The song stopped as abruptlyas it had commenced, and there was absolute silence again. My heart was thumping and blood racingthrough my temples. Had I not been petrified with fear, I should have fled immediately.
Not caring to light another match, I felt my way among the pews until I stoodin front of the door. So deep was the feeling of depression which had come over me that I feltas though I were acting in a dream. My actions were almost involuntary.
The door was locked, as I found when I turned the knob. I hammered upon itfor some time, but there was no answer. The silence was as complete as before. Feeling aroundthe edge of the door, I found the hinges, removed the pins from them, and allowed the door tofall toward me. Dim light flooded down a steep flight of steps. There was a sickening odor ofwhisky. I could now hear someone stirring in the belfry room above. Venturing a low halloo,I thought I heard a groan in reply, and cautiously climbed the stairs.
My first glance into that unhallowed place was indeed startling. Strewn aboutthe little room were old and dusty books and manuscripts—strange things that bespoke almostunbelievable age. On rows of shelves which reached to the ceiling were horrible things in glassjars and bottles—snakes and lizards and bats. Dust and mold and cobwebs encrusted everything.In the center, behind a table upon which was a lighted candle, a nearly empty bottle of whisky,and a glass, was a motionless figure with a thin, scrawny, wrinkled face and wild eyes thatstared blankly through me. I recognized Abel Foster, the old sexton, in an instant. He did notmove or speak as I came slowly and fearfully toward him.
“Mr. Foster?” I asked, trembling with unaccountable fear when I heardmy voice echo within the close confines of the room. There was no reply, and no movement fromthe figure behind the table. I wondered if he had not drunk himself to insensibility, and wentbehind the table to shake him.
At the mere touch of my arm upon his shoulder, the strange old man startedfrom his chair as though terrified. His eyes, still having in them that same blank stare, werefixed upon me. Swinging his arms like flails, he backed away.
“Don’t!” he screamed. “Don’t touch me! Go back—goback!”
I saw that he was both drunk and struck with some kind of a nameless terror. Usinga soothing tone, I told him who I was and why I had come. He seemed to understand vaguely andsank back into his chair, sitting limp and motionless.
“I thought ye was him,” he mumbled. “I thought ye was him comeback fer it. He’s been a-tryin’ t’ get out—a-tryin’ t’ get out senceI put him in there.” His voice again rose to a scream and he clutched his chair. “Maybehe’s got out now! Maybe he’s out!”
I looked about, half expecting to see some spectral shape coming up the stairs.
“Maybe who’s out?” I inquired.
“Vanderhoof!” he shrieked. “Th’ cross over his grave keepsfallin’ down in th’ night! Every morning the earth is loose, and gets harder t’ patdown. He’ll come out an’ I won’t be able t’ do nothin’.”
Forcing him back into the chair, I seated myself on a box near him. He wastrembling in mortal terror, with the saliva dripping from the corners of his mouth. From timeto time I felt that sense of horror which Haines had described when he told me of the old sexton.Truly, there was something uncanny about the man. His head had now sunk forward upon his breast,and he seemed calmer, mumbling to himself.
I quietly arose and opened a window to let out the fumes of whisky and the mustyodor of dead things. Light from a dim moon, just risen, made objects below barely visible. Icould just see Dominie Vanderhoof’s grave from my position in the belfry, and blinked myeyes as I gazed at it. That cross was tilted! I remembered that it had been verticalan hour ago. Fear took possession of me again. I turned quickly. Foster sat in his chair watchingme. His glance was saner than before.
“So ye’re Vanderhoof’s nephew,” he mumbled in a nasal tone.“Waal, ye might’s well know it all. He’ll be back arter me afore long, he will—jus’as soon as he can get out o’ that there grave. Ye might’s well know all about it now.”
His terror appeared to have left him. He seemed resigned to some horrible fatewhich he expected any minute. His head dropped down upon his chest again, and he went on mutteringin that nasal monotone.
“Ye see all them there books and papers? Waal, they was once Dominie Slott’s—DominieSlott, who was here years ago. All them things is got t’ do with magic—black magicthat th’ old Dominie knew afore he come t’ this country. They used t’ burn ’eman’ boil ’em in oil fer knowin’ that over there, they did. But old Slott knew,and he didn’t go fer t’ tell nobody. No sir, old Slott used to preach here generationsago, an’ he used to come up here an’ study them books, an’ use all them deadthings in jars, an’ pronounce magic curses an’ things, but he didn’t let nobodyknow it. No, nobody knowed it but Dominie Slott an’ me.”
“You?” I ejaculated, leaning across the table toward him.
“That is, me after I learned it.” His face showed lines of trickeryas he answered me. “I found all this stuff here when I come t’ be church sexton, an’I used t’ read it when I wa’n’t at work. An’ I soon got t’ know allabout it.”
The old man droned on, while I listened, spellbound. He told about learningthe difficult formulae of demonology, so that, by means of incantations, he could cast spellsover human beings. He had performed horrible occult rites of his hellish creed, calling downanathema upon the town and its inhabitants. Crazed by his desires, he tried to bring the churchunder his spell, but the power of God was too strong. Finding Johannes Vanderhoof very weak-willed,he bewitched him so that he preached strange and mystic sermons which struck fear into the simplehearts of the country folk. From his position in the belfry room, he said, behind a paintingof the temptation of Christ which adorned the rear wall of the church, he would glare atVanderhoof while he was preaching, through holes which were the eyes of the Devil in the picture.Terrified by the uncanny things which were happening in their midst, the congregation left oneby one, and Foster was able to do what he pleased with the church and with Vanderhoof.
“But what did you do with him?” I asked in a hollow voice as theold sexton paused in his confession. He burst into a cackle of laughter, throwing back his headin drunken glee.
“I took his soul!” he howled in a tone that set me trembling. “Itook his soul and put it in a bottle—in a little black bottle! And I buried him! But heain’t got his soul, an’ he cain’t go neither t’ heaven n’r hell! Buthe’s a-comin’ back after it. He’s a-trying’ t’ get out o’ hisgrave now. I can hear him pushin’ his way up through the ground, he’s that strong!”
As the old man had proceeded with his story, I had become more and more convincedthat he must be telling me the truth, and not merely gibbering in drunkenness. Every detailfitted what Haines had told me. Fear was growing upon me by degrees. With the old wizard nowshouting with demoniac laughter, I was tempted to bolt down the narrow stairway and leave thataccursed neighborhood. To calm myself, I rose and again looked out of the window. My eyes nearlystarted from their sockets when I saw that the cross above Vanderhoof’s grave had fallenperceptibly since I had last looked at it. It was now tilted to an angle of forty-five degrees!
“Can’t we dig up Vanderhoof and restore his soul?” I asked almostbreathlessly, feeling that something must be done in a hurry. The old man rose from his chairin terror.
“No, no, no!” he screamed. “He’d kill me! I’ve fergotth’ formula, an’ if he gets out he’ll be alive, without a soul. He’d killus both!”
“Where is the bottle that contains his soul?” I asked, advancingthreateningly toward him. I felt that some ghastly thing was about to happen, which I must doall in my power to prevent.
“I won’t tell ye, ye young whelp!” he snarled. I felt, ratherthan saw, a queer light in his eyes as he backed into a corner. “An’ don’t yetouch me, either, or ye’ll wish ye hadn’t!”
I moved a step forward, noticing that on a low stool behind him there weretwo black bottles. Foster muttered some peculiar words in a low singsong voice. Everything beganto turn gray before my eyes, and something within me seemed to be dragged upward, trying toget out at my throat. I felt my knees become weak.
Lurching forward, I caught the old sexton by the throat, and with my free armreached for the bottles on the stool. But the old man fell backward, striking the stool withhis foot, and one bottle fell to the floor as I snatched the other. There was a flash of blueflame, and a sulfurous smell filled the room. From the little heap of broken glass a white vaporrose and followed the draft out the window.
“Curse ye, ye rascal!” sounded a voice that seemed faint and faraway. Foster, whom I had released when the bottle broke, was crouching against the wall, lookingsmaller and more shriveled than before. His face was slowly turning greenish-black.
“Curse ye!” said the voice again, hardly sounding as though it camefrom his lips. “I’m done fer! That one in there was mine! Dominie Slott took itout two hundred years ago!”
He slid slowly toward the floor, gazing at me with hatred in eyes that wererapidly dimming. His flesh changed from white to black, and then to yellow. I saw with horrorthat his body seemed to be crumbling away and his clothing falling into limp folds.
The bottle in my hand was growing warm. I glanced at it, fearfully. It glowedwith a faint phosphorescence. Stiff with fright, I set it upon the table, but could not keepmy eyes from it. There was an ominous moment of silence as its glow became brighter, and thenthere came distinctly to my ears the sound of sliding earth. Gasping for breath, I looked outof the window. The moon was now well up in the sky, and by its light I could see that the freshcross above Vanderhoof’s grave had completely fallen. Once again there came the sound oftrickling gravel, and no longer able to control myself, I stumbled down the stairs and foundmy way out of doors. Falling now and then as I raced over the uneven ground, I ran on in abjectterror. When I had reached the foot of the knoll, at the entrance to that gloomy tunnel beneaththe willows, I heard a horrible roar behind me. Turning, I glanced back toward the church. Itswall reflected the light of the moon, and silhouetted against it was a gigantic, loathsome,black shadow climbing from my uncle’s grave and floundering gruesomely toward the church.
I told my story to a group of villagers in Haines’s store the next morning.They looked from one to the other with little smiles during my tale, I noticed, but when I suggestedthat they accompany me to the spot, gave various excuses for not caring to go. Though thereseemed to be a limit to their credulity, they cared to run no risks. I informed them that Iwould go alone, though I must confess that the project did not appeal to me.
As I left the store, one old man with a long, white beard hurried after meand caught my arm.
“I’ll go wi’ ye, lad,” he said. “It do seem that Ionce heared my gran’pap tell o’ su’thin’ o’ the sort concernin’old Dominie Slott. A queer old man I’ve heared he were, but Vanderhoof’s been worse.”
Dominie Vanderhoof’s grave was open and deserted when we arrived. Of courseit could have been grave-robbers, the two of us agreed, and yet.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. In thebelfry the bottle which I had left upon the table was gone, though the fragments of the brokenone were found on the floor. And upon the heap of yellow dust and crumpled clothing that hadonce been Abel Foster were certain immense footprints.
After glancing at some of the books and papers strewn about the belfry room,we carried them down the stairs and burned them, as something unclean and unholy. With a spadewhich we found in the church basement we filled in the grave of Johannes Vanderhoof, and, asan afterthought, flung the fallen cross upon the flames.
Old wives say that now, when the moon is full, there walks about the churchyarda gigantic and bewildered figure clutching a bottle and seeking some unremembered goal.
