I.

Mystery attracts mystery. Ever since the wide appearance of my name as a performer of unexplainedfeats, I have encountered strange narratives and events which my calling has led people to linkwith my interests and activities. Some of these have been trivial and irrelevant, some deeplydramatic and absorbing, some productive of weird and perilous experiences, and some involvingme in extensive scientific and historical research. Many of these matters I have told and shallcontinue to tell freely; but there is one of which I speak with great reluctance, and whichI am now relating only after a session of grilling persuasion from the publishers of this magazine,who had heard vague rumours of it from other members of my family.
The hitherto guarded subject pertains to my non-professional visit to Egyptfourteen years ago, and has been avoided by me for several reasons. For one thing, I am averseto exploiting certain unmistakably actual facts and conditions obviously unknown to the myriadtourists who throng about the pyramids and apparently secreted with much diligence by the authoritiesat Cairo, who cannot be wholly ignorant of them. For another thing, I dislike to recount anincident in which my own fantastic imagination must have played so great a part. What I saw—orthought I saw—certainly did not take place; but is rather to be viewed as a result ofmy then recent readings in Egyptology, and of the speculations anent this theme which my environmentnaturally prompted. These imaginative stimuli, magnified by the excitement of an actual eventterrible enough in itself, undoubtedly gave rise to the culminating horror of that grotesquenight so long past.
In January, 1910, I had finished a professional engagement in England and signeda contract for a tour of Australian theatres. A liberal time being allowed for the trip, I determinedto make the most of it in the sort of travel which chiefly interests me; so accompanied by mywife I drifted pleasantly down the Continent and embarked at Marseilles on the P. &amp; O. SteamerMalwa, bound for Port Said. From that point I proposed to visit the principal historicallocalities of lower Egypt before leaving finally for Australia.
The voyage was an agreeable one, and enlivened by many of the amusing incidentswhich befall a magical performer apart from his work. I had intended, for the sake of quiettravel, to keep my name a secret; but was goaded into betraying myself by a fellow-magicianwhose anxiety to astound the passengers with ordinary tricks tempted me to duplicate and exceedhis feats in a manner quite destructive of my incognito. I mention this because of its ultimateeffect—an effect I should have foreseen before unmasking to a shipload of tourists aboutto scatter throughout the Nile Valley. What it did was to herald my identity wherever I subsequentlywent, and deprive my wife and me of all the placid inconspicuousness we had sought. Travellingto seek curiosities, I was often forced to stand inspection as a sort of curiosity myself!
We had come to Egypt in search of the picturesque and the mystically impressive,but found little enough when the ship edged up to Port Said and discharged its passengers insmall boats. Low dunes of sand, bobbing buoys in shallow water, and a drearily European smalltown with nothing of interest save the great De Lesseps statue, made us anxious to get on tosomething more worth our while. After some discussion we decided to proceed at once to Cairoand the Pyramids, later going to Alexandria for the Australian boat and for whatever Graeco-Romansights that ancient metropolis might present.
The railway journey was tolerable enough, and consumed only four hours anda half. We saw much of the Suez Canal, whose route we followed as far as Ismailiya, and laterhad a taste of Old Egypt in our glimpse of the restored fresh-water canal of the Middle Empire.Then at last we saw Cairo glimmering through the growing dusk; a twinkling constellation whichbecame a blaze as we halted at the great Gare Centrale.
But once more disappointment awaited us, for all that we beheld was Europeansave the costumes and the crowds. A prosaic subway led to a square teeming with carriages, taxicabs,and trolley-cars, and gorgeous with electric lights shining on tall buildings; whilst the verytheatre where I was vainly requested to play, and which I later attended as a spectator, hadrecently been renamed the “American Cosmograph”. We stopped at Shepherd’sHotel, reached in a taxi that sped along broad, smartly built-up streets; and amidst the perfectservice of its restaurant, elevators, and generally Anglo-American luxuries the mysterious Eastand immemorial past seemed very far away.
The next day, however, precipitated us delightfully into the heart of the ArabianNights atmosphere; and in the winding ways and exotic skyline of Cairo, the Bagdad of Haroun-al-Raschidseemed to live again. Guided by our Baedeker, we had struck east past the Ezbekiyeh Gardensalong the Mouski in quest of the native quarter, and were soon in the hands of a clamorous ciceronewho—notwithstanding later developments—was assuredly a master at his trade. Notuntil afterward did I see that I should have applied at the hotel for a licenced guide. Thisman, a shaven, peculiarly hollow-voiced, and relatively cleanly fellow who looked like a Pharaohand called himself “Abdul Reis el Drogman”, appeared to have much power over othersof his kind; though subsequently the police professed not to know him, and to suggest that reis is merely a name for any person in authority, whilst “Drogman” is obviouslyno more than a clumsy modification of the word for a leader of tourist parties—dragoman.
Abdul led us among such wonders as we had before only read and dreamed of.Old Cairo is itself a story-book and a dream—labyrinths of narrow alleys redolent of aromaticsecrets; Arabesque balconies and oriels nearly meeting above the cobbled streets; maelstromsof Oriental traffic with strange cries, cracking whips, rattling carts, jingling money, andbraying donkeys; kaleidoscopes of polychrome robes, veils, turbans, and tarbushes; water-carriersand dervishes, dogs and cats, soothsayers and barbers; and over all the whining of blind beggarscrouched in alcoves, and the sonorous chanting of muezzins from minarets limned delicately againsta sky of deep, unchanging blue.
The roofed, quieter bazaars were hardly less alluring. Spice, perfume, incense,beads, rugs, silks, and brass—old Mahmoud Suleiman squats cross-legged amidst his gummybottles while chattering youths pulverise mustard in the hollowed-out capital of an ancientclassic column—a Roman Corinthian, perhaps from neighbouring Heliopolis, where Augustusstationed one of his three Egyptian legions. Antiquity begins to mingle with exoticism. Andthen the mosques and the museum—we saw them all, and tried not to let our Arabian revelsuccumb to the darker charm of Pharaonic Egypt which the museum’s priceless treasuresoffered. That was to be our climax, and for the present we concentrated on the mediaeval Saracenicglories of the Caliphs whose magnificent tomb-mosques form a glittering faery necropolis onthe edge of the Arabian Desert.
At length Abdul took us along the Sharia Mohammed Ali to the ancient mosqueof Sultan Hassan, and the tower-flanked Bab-el-Azab, beyond which climbs the steep-walled passto the mighty citadel that Saladin himself built with the stones of forgotten pyramids. It wassunset when we scaled that cliff, circled the modern mosque of Mohammed Ali, and looked downfrom the dizzying parapet over mystic Cairo—mystic Cairo all golden with its carven domes,its ethereal minarets, and its flaming gardens. Far over the city towered the great Roman domeof the new museum; and beyond it—across the cryptic yellow Nile that is the mother ofaeons and dynasties—lurked the menacing sands of the Libyan Desert, undulant and iridescentand evil with older arcana. The red sun sank low, bringing the relentless chill of Egyptiandusk; and as it stood poised on the world’s rim like that ancient god of Heliopolis—Re-Harakhte,the Horizon-Sun—we saw silhouetted against its vermeil holocaust the black outlines ofthe Pyramids of Gizeh—the palaeogean tombs there were hoary with a thousand years whenTut-Ankh-Amen mounted his golden throne in distant Thebes. Then we knew that we were done withSaracen Cairo, and that we must taste the deeper mysteries of primal Egypt—the black Khemof Re and Amen, Isis and Osiris.
The next morning we visited the pyramids, riding out in a Victoria across thegreat Nile bridge with its bronze lions, the island of Ghizereh with its massive lebbakh trees,and the smaller English bridge to the western shore. Down the shore road we drove, between greatrows of lebbakhs and past the vast Zoölogical Gardens to the suburb of Gizeh, where a newbridge to Cairo proper has since been built. Then, turning inland along the Sharia-el-Haram,we crossed a region of glassy canals and shabby native villages till before us loomed the objectsof our quest, cleaving the mists of dawn and forming inverted replicas in the roadside pools.Forty centuries, as Napoleon had told his campaigners there, indeed looked down upon us.
The road now rose abruptly, till we finally reached our place of transfer betweenthe trolley station and the Mena House Hotel. Abdul Reis, who capably purchased our pyramidtickets, seemed to have an understanding with the crowding, yelling, and offensive Bedouinswho inhabited a squalid mud village some distance away and pestiferously assailed every traveller;for he kept them very decently at bay and secured an excellent pair of camels for us, himselfmounting a donkey and assigning the leadership of our animals to a group of men and boys moreexpensive than useful. The area to be traversed was so small that camels were hardly needed,but we did not regret adding to our experience this troublesome form of desert navigation.
The pyramids stand on a high rock plateau, this group forming next to the northernmostof the series of regal and aristocratic cemeteries built in the neighbourhood of the extinctcapital Memphis, which lay on the same side of the Nile, somewhat south of Gizeh, and whichflourished between 3400 and 2000 B. C. The greatest pyramid, which lies nearest the modern road,was built by King Cheops or Khufu about 2800 B. C., and stands more than 450 feet in perpendicularheight. In a line southwest from this are successively the Second Pyramid, built a generationlater by King Khephren, and though slightly smaller, looking even larger because set on higherground, and the radically smaller Third Pyramid of King Mycerinus, built about 2700 B. C. Nearthe edge of the plateau and due east of the Second Pyramid, with a face probably altered toform a colossal portrait of Khephren, its royal restorer, stands the monstrous Sphinx—mute,sardonic, and wise beyond mankind and memory.
Minor pyramids and the traces of ruined minor pyramids are found in severalplaces, and the whole plateau is pitted with the tombs of dignitaries of less than royal rank.These latter were originally marked by mastabas, or stone bench-like structures aboutthe deep burial shafts, as found in other Memphian cemeteries and exemplified by Perneb’sTomb in the Metropolitan Museum of New York. At Gizeh, however, all such visible things havebeen swept away by time and pillage; and only the rock-hewn shafts, either sand-filled or clearedout by archaeologists, remain to attest their former existence. Connected with each tomb wasa chapel in which priests and relatives offered food and prayer to the hovering ka orvital principle of the deceased. The small tombs have their chapels contained in their stonemastabas or superstructures, but the mortuary chapels of the pyramids, where regal Pharaohslay, were separate temples, each to the east of its corresponding pyramid, and connected bya causeway to a massive gate-chapel or propylon at the edge of the rock plateau.
The gate-chapel leading to the Second Pyramid, nearly buried in the driftingsands, yawns subterraneously southeast of the Sphinx. Persistent tradition dubs it the “Templeof the Sphinx”; and it may perhaps be rightly called such if the Sphinx indeed representsthe Second Pyramid’s builder Khephren. There are unpleasant tales of the Sphinx beforeKhephren—but whatever its elder features were, the monarch replaced them with his ownthat men might look at the colossus without fear. It was in the great gateway-temple that thelife-size diorite statue of Khephren now in the Cairo Museum was found; a statue before whichI stood in awe when I beheld it. Whether the whole edifice is now excavated I am not certain,but in 1910 most of it was below ground, with the entrance heavily barred at night. Germanswere in charge of the work, and the war or other things may have stopped them. I would givemuch, in view of my experience and of certain Bedouin whisperings discredited or unknown inCairo, to know what has developed in connexion with a certain well in a transverse gallery wherestatues of the Pharaoh were found in curious juxtaposition to the statues of baboons.
The road, as we traversed it on our camels that morning, curved sharply pastthe wooden police quarters, post-office, drug-store, and shops on the left, and plunged southand east in a complete bend that scaled the rock plateau and brought us face to face with thedesert under the lee of the Great Pyramid. Past Cyclopean masonry we rode, rounding the easternface and looking down ahead into a valley of minor pyramids beyond which the eternal Nile glistenedto the east, and the eternal desert shimmered to the west. Very close loomed the three majorpyramids, the greatest devoid of outer casing and shewing its bulk of great stones, but theothers retaining here and there the neatly fitted covering which had made them smooth and finishedin their day.
Presently we descended toward the Sphinx, and sat silent beneath the spellof those terrible unseeing eyes. On the vast stone breast we faintly discerned the emblem ofRe-Harakhte, for whose image the Sphinx was mistaken in a late dynasty; and though sand coveredthe tablet between the great paws, we recalled what Thutmosis IV inscribed thereon, and thedream he had when a prince. It was then that the smile of the Sphinx vaguely displeased us,and made us wonder about the legends of subterranean passages beneath the monstrous creature,leading down, down, to depths none might dare hint at—depths connected with mysteriesolder than the dynastic Egypt we excavate, and having a sinister relation to the persistenceof abnormal, animal-headed gods in the ancient Nilotic pantheon. Then, too, it was I asked myselfan idle question whose hideous significance was not to appear for many an hour.
Other tourists now began to overtake us, and we moved on to the sand-chokedTemple of the Sphinx, fifty yards to the southeast, which I have previously mentioned as thegreat gate of the causeway to the Second Pyramid’s mortuary chapel on the plateau. Mostof it was still underground, and although we dismounted and descended through a modern passagewayto its alabaster corridor and pillared hall, I felt that Abdul and the local German attendanthad not shewn us all there was to see. After this we made the conventional circuit of the pyramidplateau, examining the Second Pyramid and the peculiar ruins of its mortuary chapel to the east,the Third Pyramid and its miniature southern satellites and ruined eastern chapel, the rocktombs and the honeycombings of the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties, and the famous Campell’sTomb whose shadowy shaft sinks precipitously for 53 feet to a sinister sarcophagus which oneof our camel-drivers divested of the cumbering sand after a vertiginous descent by rope.
Cries now assailed us from the Great Pyramid, where Bedouins were besieginga party of tourists with offers of guidance to the top, or of displays of speed in the performanceof solitary trips up and down. Seven minutes is said to be the record for such an ascent anddescent, but many lusty sheiks and sons of sheiks assured us they could cut it to five if giventhe requisite impetus of liberal baksheesh. They did not get this impetus, though wedid let Abdul take us up, thus obtaining a view of unprecedented magnificence which includednot only remote and glittering Cairo with its crowned citadel and background of gold-violethills, but all the pyramids of the Memphian district as well, from Abu Roash on the north tothe Dashur on the south. The Sakkara step-pyramid, which marks the evolution of the low mastabainto the true pyramid, shewed clearly and alluringly in the sandy distance. It is close to thistransition-monument that the famed Tomb of Perneb was found—more than 400 miles northof the Theban rock valley where Tut-Ankh-Amen sleeps. Again I was forced to silence throughsheer awe. The prospect of such antiquity, and the secrets each hoary monument seemed to holdand brood over, filled me with a reverence and sense of immensity nothing else ever gave me.
Fatigued by our climb, and disgusted with the importunate Bedouins whose actionsseemed to defy every rule of taste, we omitted the arduous detail of entering the cramped interiorpassages of any of the pyramids, though we saw several of the hardiest tourists preparing forthe suffocating crawl through Cheops’ mightiest memorial. As we dismissed and overpaidour local bodyguard and drove back to Cairo with Abdul Reis under the afternoon sun, we halfregretted the omission we had made. Such fascinating things were whispered about lower pyramidpassages not in the guide-books; passages whose entrances had been hastily blocked up and concealedby certain uncommunicative archaeologists who had found and begun to explore them. Of course,this whispering was largely baseless on the face of it; but it was curious to reflect how persistentlyvisitors were forbidden to enter the pyramids at night, or to visit the lowest burrows and cryptof the Great Pyramid. Perhaps in the latter case it was the psychological effect which was feared—theeffect on the visitor of feeling himself huddled down beneath a gigantic world of solid masonry;joined to the life he has known by the merest tube, in which he may only crawl, and which anyaccident or evil design might block. The whole subject seemed so weird and alluring that weresolved to pay the pyramid plateau another visit at the earliest possible opportunity. Forme this opportunity came much earlier than I expected.
That evening, the members of our party feeling somewhat tired after the strenuousprogramme of the day, I went alone with Abdul Reis for a walk through the picturesque Arab quarter.Though I had seen it by day, I wished to study the alleys and bazaars in the dusk, when richshadows and mellow gleams of light would add to their glamour and fantastic illusion. The nativecrowds were thinning, but were still very noisy and numerous when we came upon a knot of revellingBedouins in the Suken-Nahhasin, or bazaar of the coppersmiths. Their apparent leader, an insolentyouth with heavy features and saucily cocked tarbush, took some notice of us; and evidentlyrecognised with no great friendliness my competent but admittedly supercilious and sneeringlydisposed guide. Perhaps, I thought, he resented that odd reproduction of the Sphinx’s half-smilewhich I had often remarked with amused irritation; or perhaps he did not like the hollow andsepulchral resonance of Abdul’s voice. At any rate, the exchange of ancestrally opprobriouslanguage became very brisk; and before long Ali Ziz, as I heard the stranger called when calledby no worse name, began to pull violently at Abdul’s robe, an action quickly reciprocated,and leading to a spirited scuffle in which both combatants lost their sacredly cherished headgearand would have reached an even direr condition had I not intervened and separated them by mainforce.
My interference, at first seemingly unwelcome on both sides, succeeded at lastin effecting a truce. Sullenly each belligerent composed his wrath and his attire; and withan assumption of dignity as profound as it was sudden, the two formed a curious pact of honourwhich I soon learned is a custom of great antiquity in Cairo—a pact for the settlementof their difference by means of a nocturnal fist fight atop the Great Pyramid, long after thedeparture of the last moonlight sightseer. Each duellist was to assemble a party of seconds,and the affair was to begin at midnight, proceeding by rounds in the most civilised possiblefashion. In all this planning there was much which excited my interest. The fight itself promisedto be unique and spectacular, while the thought of the scene on that hoary pile overlookingthe antediluvian plateau of Gizeh under the wan moon of the pallid small hours appealed to everyfibre of imagination in me. A request found Abdul exceedingly willing to admit me to his partyof seconds; so that all the rest of the early evening I accompanied him to various dens in themost lawless regions of the town—mostly northeast of the Ezbekiyeh—where he gatheredone by one a select and formidable band of congenial cutthroats as his pugilistic background.
Shortly after nine our party, mounted on donkeys bearing such royal or tourist-reminiscentnames as “Rameses”, “Mark Twain”, “J. P. Morgan”, and “Minnehaha”,edged through street labyrinths both Oriental and Occidental, crossed the muddy and mast-forestedNile by the bridge of the bronze lions, and cantered philosophically between the lebbakhs onthe road to Gizeh. Slightly over two hours were consumed by the trip, toward the end of whichwe passed the last of the returning tourists, saluted the last in-bound trolley-car, and werealone with the night and the past and the spectral moon.
Then we saw the vast pyramids at the end of the avenue, ghoulish with a dimatavistical menace which I had not seemed to notice in the daytime. Even the smallest of themheld a hint of the ghastly—for was it not in this that they had buried Queen Nitokrisalive in the Sixth Dynasty; subtle Queen Nitokris, who once invited all her enemies to a feastin a temple below the Nile, and drowned them by opening the water-gates? I recalled that theArabs whisper things about Nitokris, and shun the Third Pyramid at certain phases of the moon.It must have been over her that Thomas Moore was brooding when he wrote a thing muttered aboutby Memphian boatmen—

“Thesubterranean nymph that dwells
’Mid sunless gems and glories hid—
The ladyof the Pyramid!”

Early as we were, Ali Ziz and his party were ahead of us; for we saw theirdonkeys outlined against the desert plateau at Kafr-el-Haram; toward which squalid Arab settlement,close to the Sphinx, we had diverged instead of following the regular road to the Mena House,where some of the sleepy, inefficient police might have observed and halted us. Here, wherefilthy Bedouins stabled camels and donkeys in the rock tombs of Khephren’s courtiers,we were led up the rocks and over the sand to the Great Pyramid, up whose time-worn sides theArabs swarmed eagerly, Abdul Reis offering me the assistance I did not need.
As most travellers know, the actual apex of this structure has long been wornaway, leaving a reasonably flat platform twelve yards square. On this eerie pinnacle a squaredcircle was formed, and in a few moments the sardonic desert moon leered down upon a battle which,but for the quality of the ringside cries, might well have occurred at some minor athletic clubin America. As I watched it, I felt that some of our less desirable institutions were not lacking;for every blow, feint, and defence bespoke “stalling” to my not inexperienced eye.It was quickly over, and despite my misgivings as to methods I felt a sort of proprietary pridewhen Abdul Reis was adjudged the winner.
Reconciliation was phenomenally rapid, and amidst the singing, fraternising,and drinking which followed, I found it difficult to realise that a quarrel had ever occurred.Oddly enough, I myself seemed to be more of a centre of notice than the antagonists; and frommy smattering of Arabic I judged that they were discussing my professional performances andescapes from every sort of manacle and confinement, in a manner which indicated not only a surprisingknowledge of me, but a distinct hostility and scepticism concerning my feats of escape. It graduallydawned on me that the elder magic of Egypt did not depart without leaving traces, and that fragmentsof a strange secret lore and priestly cult-practices have survived surreptitiously amongst thefellaheen to such an extent that the prowess of a strange “hahwi” or magician isresented and disputed. I thought of how much my hollow-voiced guide Abdul Reis looked like anold Egyptian priest or Pharaoh or smiling Sphinx&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and wondered.
Suddenly something happened which in a flash proved the correctness of my reflectionsand made me curse the denseness whereby I had accepted this night’s events as other thanthe empty and malicious “frameup” they now shewed themselves to be. Without warning,and doubtless in answer to some subtle sign from Abdul, the entire band of Bedouins precipitateditself upon me; and having produced heavy ropes, soon had me bound as securely as I was everbound in the course of my life, either on the stage or off. I struggled at first, but soon sawthat one man could make no headway against a band of over twenty sinewy barbarians. My handswere tied behind my back, my knees bent to their fullest extent, and my wrists and ankles stoutlylinked together with unyielding cords. A stifling gag was forced into my mouth, and a blindfoldfastened tightly over my eyes. Then, as the Arabs bore me aloft on their shoulders and begana jouncing descent of the pyramid, I heard the taunts of my late guide Abdul, who mocked andjeered delightedly in his hollow voice, and assured me that I was soon to have my “magicpowers” put to a supreme test which would quickly remove any egotism I might have gainedthrough triumphing over all the tests offered by America and Europe. Egypt, he reminded me,is very old; and full of inner mysteries and antique powers not even conceivable to the expertsof today, whose devices had so uniformly failed to entrap me.
How far or in what direction I was carried, I cannot tell; for the circumstanceswere all against the formation of any accurate judgment. I know, however, that it could nothave been a great distance; since my bearers at no point hastened beyond a walk, yet kept mealoft a surprisingly short time. It is this perplexing brevity which makes me feel almost likeshuddering whenever I think of Gizeh and its plateau—for one is oppressed by hints ofthe closeness to every-day tourist routes of what existed then and must exist still.
The evil abnormality I speak of did not become manifest at first. Setting medown on a surface which I recognised as sand rather than rock, my captors passed a rope aroundmy chest and dragged me a few feet to a ragged opening in the ground, into which they presentlylowered me with much rough handling. For apparent aeons I bumped against the stony irregularsides of a narrow hewn well which I took to be one of the numerous burial shafts of the plateauuntil the prodigious, almost incredible depth of it robbed me of all bases of conjecture.
The horror of the experience deepened with every dragging second. That anydescent through the sheer solid rock could be so vast without reaching the core of the planetitself, or that any rope made by man could be so long as to dangle me in these unholy and seeminglyfathomless profundities of nether earth, were beliefs of such grotesqueness that it was easierto doubt my agitated senses than to accept them. Even now I am uncertain, for I know how deceitfulthe sense of time becomes when one or more of the usual perceptions or conditions of life isremoved or distorted. But I am quite sure that I preserved a logical consciousness that far;that at least I did not add any full-grown phantoms of imagination to a picture hideous enoughin its reality, and explicable by a type of cerebral illusion vastly short of actual hallucination.
All this was not the cause of my first bit of fainting. The shocking ordealwas cumulative, and the beginning of the later terrors was a very perceptible increase in myrate of descent. They were paying out that infinitely long rope very swiftly now, and I scrapedcruelly against the rough and constricted sides of the shaft as I shot madly downward. My clothingwas in tatters, and I felt the trickle of blood all over, even above the mounting and excruciatingpain. My nostrils, too, were assailed by a scarcely definable menace; a creeping odour of dampand staleness curiously unlike anything I had ever smelt before, and having faint overtonesof spice and incense that lent an element of mockery.
Then the mental cataclysm came. It was horrible—hideous beyond all articulatedescription because it was all of the soul, with nothing of detail to describe. It was the ecstasyof nightmare and the summation of the fiendish. The suddenness of it was apocalyptic and daemoniac—onemoment I was plunging agonisingly down that narrow well of million-toothed torture, yet thenext moment I was soaring on bat-wings in the gulfs of hell; swinging free and swoopingly throughillimitable miles of boundless, musty space; rising dizzily to measureless pinnacles of chillingether, then diving gaspingly to sucking nadirs of ravenous, nauseous lower vacua.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Thank God for the mercy that shut out in oblivion those clawing Furies of consciousness whichhalf unhinged my faculties, and tore Harpy-like at my spirit! That one respite, short as itwas, gave me the strength and sanity to endure those still greater sublimations of cosmic panicthat lurked and gibbered on the road ahead.

II.

It was very gradually that I regained my senses after that eldritch flight through Stygian space.The process was infinitely painful, and coloured by fantastic dreams in which my bound and gaggedcondition found singular embodiment. The precise nature of these dreams was very clear whileI was experiencing them, but became blurred in my recollection almost immediately afterward,and was soon reduced to the merest outline by the terrible events—real or imaginary—whichfollowed. I dreamed that I was in the grasp of a great and horrible paw; a yellow, hairy, five-clawedpaw which had reached out of the earth to crush and engulf me. And when I stopped to reflectwhat the paw was, it seemed to me that it was Egypt. In the dream I looked back at the eventsof the preceding weeks, and saw myself lured and enmeshed little by little, subtly and insidiously,by some hellish ghoul-spirit of the elder Nile sorcery; some spirit that was in Egypt beforeever man was, and that will be when man is no more.
I saw the horror and unwholesome antiquity of Egypt, and the grisly allianceit has always had with the tombs and temples of the dead. I saw phantom processions of priestswith the heads of bulls, falcons, cats, and ibises; phantom processions marching interminablythrough subterraneous labyrinths and avenues of titanic propylaea beside which a man is as afly, and offering unnamable sacrifices to indescribable gods. Stone colossi marched in endlessnight and drove herds of grinning androsphinxes down to the shores of illimitable stagnant riversof pitch. And behind it all I saw the ineffable malignity of primordial necromancy, black andamorphous, and fumbling greedily after me in the darkness to choke out the spirit that had daredto mock it by emulation. In my sleeping brain there took shape a melodrama of sinister hatredand pursuit, and I saw the black soul of Egypt singling me out and calling me in inaudible whispers;calling and luring me, leading me on with the glitter and glamour of a Saracenic surface, butever pulling me down to the age-mad catacombs and horrors of its dead and abysmal pharaonicheart.
Then the dream-faces took on human resemblances, and I saw my guide Abdul Reisin the robes of a king, with the sneer of the Sphinx on his features. And I knew that thosefeatures were the features of Khephren the Great, who raised the Second Pyramid, carved overthe Sphinx’s face in the likeness of his own, and built that titanic gateway temple whosemyriad corridors the archaeologists think they have dug out of the cryptical sand and the uninformativerock. And I looked at the long, lean, rigid hand of Khephren; the long, lean, rigid hand asI had seen it on the diorite statue in the Cairo Museum—the statue they had found in theterrible gateway temple—and wondered that I had not shrieked when I saw it on Abdul Reis.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.That hand! It was hideously cold, and it was crushing me; it was the cold and cramping of thesarcophagus&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the chill and constriction of unrememberable Egypt.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.It was nighted, necropolitan Egypt itself&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that yellow paw&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.and they whisper such things of Khephren.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
But at this juncture I began to awake—or at least, to assume a conditionless completely that of sleep than the one just preceding. I recalled the fight atop the pyramid,the treacherous Bedouins and their attack, my frightful descent by rope through endless rockdepths, and my mad swinging and plunging in a chill void redolent of aromatic putrescence. Iperceived that I now lay on a damp rock floor, and that my bonds were still biting into me withunloosened force. It was very cold, and I seemed to detect a faint current of noisome air sweepingacross me. The cuts and bruises I had received from the jagged sides of the rock shaft werepaining me woefully, their soreness enhanced to a stinging or burning acuteness by some pungentquality in the faint draught, and the mere act of rolling over was enough to set my whole framethrobbing with untold agony. As I turned I felt a tug from above, and concluded that the ropewhereby I was lowered still reached to the surface. Whether or not the Arabs still held it,I had no idea; nor had I any idea how far within the earth I was. I knew that the darkness aroundme was wholly or nearly total, since no ray of moonlight penetrated my blindfold; but I didnot trust my senses enough to accept as evidence of extreme depth the sensation of vast durationwhich had characterised my descent.
Knowing at least that I was in a space of considerable extent reached fromthe surface directly above by an opening in the rock, I doubtfully conjectured that my prisonwas perhaps the buried gateway chapel of old Khephren—the Temple of the Sphinx—perhapssome inner corridor which the guides had not shewn me during my morning visit, and from whichI might easily escape if I could find my way to the barred entrance. It would be a labyrinthinewandering, but no worse than others out of which I had in the past found my way. The first stepwas to get free of my bonds, gag, and blindfold; and this I knew would be no great task, sincesubtler experts than these Arabs had tried every known species of fetter upon me during my longand varied career as an exponent of escape, yet had never succeeded in defeating my methods.
Then it occurred to me that the Arabs might be ready to meet and attack meat the entrance upon any evidence of my probable escape from the binding cords, as would befurnished by any decided agitation of the rope which they probably held. This, of course, wastaking for granted that my place of confinement was indeed Khephren’s Temple of the Sphinx.The direct opening in the roof, wherever it might lurk, could not be beyond easy reach of theordinary modern entrance near the Sphinx; if in truth it were any great distance at all on thesurface, since the total area known to visitors is not at all enormous. I had not noticed anysuch opening during my daytime pilgrimage, but knew that these things are easily overlookedamidst the drifting sands. Thinking these matters over as I lay bent and bound on the rock floor,I nearly forgot the horrors of the abysmal descent and cavernous swinging which had so latelyreduced me to a coma. My present thought was only to outwit the Arabs, and I accordingly determinedto work myself free as quickly as possible, avoiding any tug on the descending line which mightbetray an effective or even problematical attempt at freedom.
This, however, was more easily determined than effected. A few preliminarytrials made it clear that little could be accomplished without considerable motion; and it didnot surprise me when, after one especially energetic struggle, I began to feel the coils offalling rope as they piled up about me and upon me. Obviously, I thought, the Bedouins had feltmy movements and released their end of the rope; hastening no doubt to the temple’s trueentrance to lie murderously in wait for me. The prospect was not pleasing—but I had facedworse in my time without flinching, and would not flinch now. At present I must first of allfree myself of bonds, then trust to ingenuity to escape from the temple unharmed. It is curioushow implicitly I had come to believe myself in the old temple of Khephren beside the Sphinx,only a short distance below the ground.
That belief was shattered, and every pristine apprehension of preternaturaldepth and daemoniac mystery revived, by a circumstance which grew in horror and significanceeven as I formulated my philosophical plan. I have said that the falling rope was piling upabout and upon me. Now I saw that it was continuing to pile, as no rope of normal lengthcould possibly do. It gained in momentum and became an avalanche of hemp, accumulating mountainouslyon the floor, and half burying me beneath its swiftly multiplying coils. Soon I was completelyengulfed and gasping for breath as the increasing convolutions submerged and stifled me. Mysenses tottered again, and I vainly tried to fight off a menace desperate and ineluctable. Itwas not merely that I was tortured beyond human endurance—not merely that life and breathseemed to be crushed slowly out of me—it was the knowledge of what those unnaturallengths of rope implied, and the consciousness of what unknown and incalculable gulfs ofinner earth must at this moment be surrounding me. My endless descent and swinging flight throughgoblin space, then, must have been real; and even now I must be lying helpless in some namelesscavern world toward the core of the planet. Such a sudden confirmation of ultimate horror wasinsupportable, and a second time I lapsed into merciful oblivion.
When I say oblivion, I do not imply that I was free from dreams. On the contrary,my absence from the conscious world was marked by visions of the most unutterable hideousness.God!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. If only I had not read so much Egyptology before coming to this land whichis the fountain of all darkness and terror! This second spell of fainting filled my sleepingmind anew with shivering realisation of the country and its archaic secrets, and through somedamnable chance my dreams turned to the ancient notions of the dead and their sojournings insoul and body beyond those mysterious tombs which were more houses than graves. I recalled,in dream-shapes which it is well that I do not remember, the peculiar and elaborate constructionof Egyptian sepulchres; and the exceedingly singular and terrific doctrines which determinedthis construction.
All these people thought of was death and the dead. They conceived of a literalresurrection of the body which made them mummify it with desperate care, and preserve all thevital organs in canopic jars near the corpse; whilst besides the body they believed in two otherelements, the soul, which after its weighing and approval by Osiris dwelt in the land of theblest, and the obscure and portentous ka or life-principle which wandered about the upperand lower worlds in a horrible way, demanding occasional access to the preserved body, consumingthe food offerings brought by priests and pious relatives to the mortuary chapel, and sometimes—asmen whispered—taking its body or the wooden double always buried beside it and stalkingnoxiously abroad on errands peculiarly repellent.
For thousands of years those bodies rested gorgeously encased and staring glassilyupward when not visited by the ka, awaiting the day when Osiris should restore both ka and soul, and lead forth the stiff legions of the dead from the sunken houses of sleep.It was to have been a glorious rebirth—but not all souls were approved, nor were all tombsinviolate, so that certain grotesque mistakes and fiendish abnormalities wereto be looked for. Even today the Arabs murmur of unsanctified convocations and unwholesome worshipin forgotten nether abysses, which only winged invisible kas and soulless mummies mayvisit and return unscathed.
Perhaps the most leeringly blood-congealing legends are those which relateto certain perverse products of decadent priestcraft—composite mummies made bythe artificial union of human trunks and limbs with the heads of animals in imitation of theelder gods. At all stages of history the sacred animals were mummified, so that consecratedbulls, cats, ibises, crocodiles, and the like might return some day to greater glory. But onlyin the decadence did they mix the human and animal in the same mummy—only in the decadence,when they did not understand the rights and prerogatives of the ka and the soul. Whathappened to those composite mummies is not told of—at least publicly—and it is certainthat no Egyptologist ever found one. The whispers of Arabs are very wild, and cannot be reliedupon. They even hint that old Khephren—he of the Sphinx, the Second Pyramid, and the yawninggateway temple—lives far underground wedded to the ghoul-queen Nitokris and ruling overthe mummies that are neither of man nor of beast.
It was of these—of Khephren and his consort and his strange armies ofthe hybrid dead—that I dreamed, and that is why I am glad the exact dream-shapes havefaded from my memory. My most horrible vision was connected with an idle question I had askedmyself the day before when looking at the great carven riddle of the desert and wondering withwhat unknown depths the temple so close to it might be secretly connected. That question, soinnocent and whimsical then, assumed in my dream a meaning of frenetic and hysterical madness&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.what huge and loathsome abnormality was the Sphinx originally carven to represent?
My second awakening—if awakening it was—is a memory of stark hideousnesswhich nothing else in my life—save one thing which came after—can parallel; andthat life has been full and adventurous beyond most men’s. Remember that I had lost consciousnesswhilst buried beneath a cascade of falling rope whose immensity revealed the cataclysmic depthof my present position. Now, as perception returned, I felt the entire weight gone; and realisedupon rolling over that although I was still tied, gagged, and blindfolded, some agency hadremoved completely the suffocating hempen landslide which had overwhelmed me. The significanceof this condition, of course, came to me only gradually; but even so I think it would have broughtunconsciousness again had I not by this time reached such a state of emotional exhaustion thatno new horror could make much difference. I was alone&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with what?
Before I could torture myself with any new reflection, or make any fresh effortto escape from my bonds, an additional circumstance became manifest. Pains not formerly feltwere racking my arms and legs, and I seemed coated with a profusion of dried blood beyond anythingmy former cuts and abrasions could furnish. My chest, too, seemed pierced by an hundred wounds,as though some malign, titanic ibis had been pecking at it. Assuredly the agency which had removedthe rope was a hostile one, and had begun to wreak terrible injuries upon me when somehow impelledto desist. Yet at the time my sensations were distinctly the reverse of what one might expect.Instead of sinking into a bottomless pit of despair, I was stirred to a new courage and action;for now I felt that the evil forces were physical things which a fearless man might encounteron an even basis.
On the strength of this thought I tugged again at my bonds, and used all theart of a lifetime to free myself as I had so often done amidst the glare of lights and the applauseof vast crowds. The familiar details of my escaping process commenced to engross me, and nowthat the long rope was gone I half regained my belief that the supreme horrors were hallucinationsafter all, and that there had never been any terrible shaft, measureless abyss, or interminablerope. Was I after all in the gateway temple of Khephren beside the Sphinx, and had the sneakingArabs stolen in to torture me as I lay helpless there? At any rate, I must be free. Let me standup unbound, ungagged, and with eyes open to catch any glimmer of light which might come tricklingfrom any source, and I could actually delight in the combat against evil and treacherous foes!
How long I took in shaking off my encumbrances I cannot tell. It must havebeen longer than in my exhibition performances, because I was wounded, exhausted, and enervatedby the experiences I had passed through. When I was finally free, and taking deep breaths ofa chill, damp, evilly spiced air all the more horrible when encountered without the screen ofgag and blindfold edges, I found that I was too cramped and fatigued to move at once. ThereI lay, trying to stretch a frame bent and mangled, for an indefinite period, and straining myeyes to catch a glimpse of some ray of light which would give a hint as to my position.
By degrees my strength and flexibility returned, but my eyes beheld nothing.As I staggered to my feet I peered diligently in every direction, yet met only an ebony blacknessas great as that I had known when blindfolded. I tried my legs, blood-encrusted beneath my shreddedtrousers, and found that I could walk; yet could not decide in what direction to go. ObviouslyI ought not to walk at random, and perhaps retreat directly from the entrance I sought; so Ipaused to note the direction of the cold, foetid, natron-scented air-current which I had neverceased to feel. Accepting the point of its source as the possible entrance to the abyss, I stroveto keep track of this landmark and to walk consistently toward it.
I had had a match box with me, and even a small electric flashlight; but ofcourse the pockets of my tossed and tattered clothing were long since emptied of all heavy articles.As I walked cautiously in the blackness, the draught grew stronger and more offensive, tillat length I could regard it as nothing less than a tangible stream of detestable vapour pouringout of some aperture like the smoke of the genie from the fisherman’s jar in the Easterntale. The East&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Egypt&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. truly, this dark cradle of civilisationwas ever the well-spring of horrors and marvels unspeakable! The more I reflected on the natureof this cavern wind, the greater my sense of disquiet became; for although despite its odourI had sought its source as at least an indirect clue to the outer world, I now saw plainly thatthis foul emanation could have no admixture or connexion whatsoever with the clean air of theLibyan Desert, but must be essentially a thing vomited from sinister gulfs still lower down.I had, then, been walking in the wrong direction!
After a moment’s reflection I decided not to retrace my steps. Away fromthe draught I would have no landmarks, for the roughly level rock floor was devoid of distinctiveconfigurations. If, however, I followed up the strange current, I would undoubtedly arrive atan aperture of some sort, from whose gate I could perhaps work round the walls to the oppositeside of this Cyclopean and otherwise unnavigable hall. That I might fail, I well realised. Isaw that this was no part of Khephren’s gateway temple which tourists know, and it struckme that this particular hall might be unknown even to archaeologists, and merely stumbled uponby the inquisitive and malignant Arabs who had imprisoned me. If so, was there any present gateof escape to the known parts or to the outer air?
What evidence, indeed, did I now possess that this was the gateway temple atall? For a moment all my wildest speculations rushed back upon me, and I thought of that vividmélange of impressions—descent, suspension in space, the rope, my wounds, and thedreams that were frankly dreams. Was this the end of life for me? Or indeed, would it be mercifulif this moment were the end? I could answer none of my own questions, but merely kepton till Fate for a third time reduced me to oblivion. This time there were no dreams, for thesuddenness of the incident shocked me out of all thought either conscious or subconscious. Trippingon an unexpected descending step at a point where the offensive draught became strong enoughto offer an actual physical resistance, I was precipitated headlong down a black flight of hugestone stairs into a gulf of hideousness unrelieved.
That I ever breathed again is a tribute to the inherent vitality of the healthyhuman organism. Often I look back to that night and feel a touch of actual humour inthose repeated lapses of consciousness; lapses whose succession reminded me at the time of nothingmore than the crude cinema melodramas of that period. Of course, it is possible that the repeatedlapses never occurred; and that all the features of that underground nightmare were merely thedreams of one long coma which began with the shock of my descent into that abyss and ended withthe healing balm of the outer air and of the rising sun which found me stretched on the sandsof Gizeh before the sardonic and dawn-flushed face of the Great Sphinx.
I prefer to believe this latter explanation as much as I can, hence was gladwhen the police told me that the barrier to Khephren’s gateway temple had been found unfastened,and that a sizeable rift to the surface did actually exist in one corner of the still buriedpart. I was glad, too, when the doctors pronounced my wounds only those to be expected frommy seizure, blindfolding, lowering, struggling with bonds, falling some distance—perhapsinto a depression in the temple’s inner gallery—dragging myself to the outer barrierand escaping from it, and experiences like that&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a very soothing diagnosis. Andyet I know that there must be more than appears on the surface. That extreme descent is toovivid a memory to be dismissed—and it is odd that no one has ever been able to find aman answering the description of my guide Abdul Reis el Drogman—the tomb-throated guidewho looked and smiled like King Khephren.
I have digressed from my connected narrative—perhaps in the vain hopeof evading the telling of that final incident; that incident which of all is most certainlyan hallucination. But I promised to relate it, and do not break promises. When I recovered—orseemed to recover—my senses after that fall down the black stone stairs, I was quite asalone and in darkness as before. The windy stench, bad enough before, was now fiendish; yetI had acquired enough familiarity by this time to bear it stoically. Dazedly I began to crawlaway from the place whence the putrid wind came, and with my bleeding hands felt the colossalblocks of a mighty pavement. Once my head struck against a hard object, and when I felt of itI learned that it was the base of a column—a column of unbelievable immensity—whosesurface was covered with gigantic chiselled hieroglyphics very perceptible to my touch. Crawlingon, I encountered other titan columns at incomprehensible distances apart; when suddenly myattention was captured by the realisation of something which must have been impinging on mysubconscious hearing long before the conscious sense was aware of it.
From some still lower chasm in earth’s bowels were proceeding certainsounds, measured and definite, and like nothing I had ever heard before. That they werevery ancient and distinctly ceremonial, I felt almost intuitively; and much reading in Egyptologyled me to associate them with the flute, the sambuke, the sistrum, and the tympanum. In theirrhythmic piping, droning, rattling, and beating I felt an element of terror beyond all the knownterrors of earth—a terror peculiarly dissociated from personal fear, and taking the formof a sort of objective pity for our planet, that it should hold within its depths such horrorsas must lie beyond these aegipanic cacophonies. The sounds increased in volume, and I felt thatthey were approaching. Then—and may all the gods of all pantheons unite to keep the likefrom my ears again—I began to hear, faintly and afar off, the morbid and millennialtramping of the marching things.
It was hideous that footfalls so dissimilar should move in such perfectrhythm. The training of unhallowed thousands of years must lie behind that march of earth’sinmost monstrosities&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. padding, clicking, walking, stalking, rumbling, lumbering,crawling&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and all to the abhorrent discords of those mocking instruments.And then&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God keep the memory of those Arab legends out of my head! Themummies without souls&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the meeting-place of the wandering kas&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.the hordes of the devil-cursed pharaonic dead of forty centuries&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the composite mummies led through the uttermost onyx voids by King Khephren and his ghoul-queenNitokris.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
The tramping drew nearer—heaven save me from the sound of those feetand paws and hooves and pads and talons as it commenced to acquire detail! Down limitless reachesof sunless pavement a spark of light flickered in the malodorous wind, and I drew behind theenormous circumference of a Cyclopic column that I might escape for a while the horror thatwas stalking million-footed toward me through gigantic hypostyles of inhuman dread and phobicantiquity. The flickers increased, and the tramping and dissonant rhythm grew sickeningly loud.In the quivering orange light there stood faintly forth a scene of such stony awe that I gaspedfrom a sheer wonder that conquered even fear and repulsion. Bases of columns whose middles werehigher than human sight&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. mere bases of things that must each dwarf the EiffelTower to insignificance&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hieroglyphics carved by unthinkable hands in cavernswhere daylight can be only a remote legend.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
I would not look at the marching things. That I desperately resolvedas I heard their creaking joints and nitrous wheezing above the dead music and the dead tramping.It was merciful that they did not speak&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but God! their crazy torchesbegan to cast shadows on the surface of those stupendous columns. Heaven take it away! Hippopotami should not have human hands and carry torches&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. men should nothave the heads of crocodiles.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
I tried to turn away, but the shadows and the sounds and the stench were everywhere.Then I remembered something I used to do in half-conscious nightmares as a boy, and began torepeat to myself, “This is a dream! This is a dream!” But it was of no use, andI could only shut my eyes and pray&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at least, that is what I think I did,for one is never sure in visions—and I know this can have been nothing more. I wonderedwhether I should ever reach the world again, and at times would furtively open my eyes to seeif I could discern any feature of the place other than the wind of spiced putrefaction, thetopless columns, and the thaumatropically grotesque shadows of abnormal horror. The sputteringglare of multiplying torches now shone, and unless this hellish place were wholly without walls,I could not fail to see some boundary or fixed landmark soon. But I had to shut my eyes againwhen I realised how many of the things were assembling—and when I glimpsed a certainobject walking solemnly and steadily without any body above the waist.
A fiendish and ululant corpse-gurgle or death-rattle now split the very atmosphere—thecharnel atmosphere poisonous with naphtha and bitumen blasts—in one concerted chorus fromthe ghoulish legion of hybrid blasphemies. My eyes, perversely shaken open, gazed for an instantupon a sight which no human creature could even imagine without panic fear and physical exhaustion.The things had filed ceremonially in one direction, the direction of the noisome wind, wherethe light of their torches shewed their bended heads&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or the bended heads ofsuch as had heads.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. They were worshipping before a great black foetor-belchingaperture which reached up almost out of sight, and which I could see was flanked at right anglesby two giant staircases whose ends were far away in shadow. One of these was indubitably thestaircase I had fallen down.
The dimensions of the hole were fully in proportion with those of the columns—anordinary house would have been lost in it, and any average public building could easily havebeen moved in and out. It was so vast a surface that only by moving the eye could one traceits boundaries&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so vast, so hideously black, and so aromatically stinking.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Directly in front of this yawning Polyphemus-door the things were throwing objects—evidentlysacrifices or religious offerings, to judge by their gestures. Khephren was their leader; sneeringKing Khephren or the guide Abdul Reis, crowned with a golden pshent and intoning endlessformulae with the hollow voice of the dead. By his side knelt beautiful Queen Nitokris, whomI saw in profile for a moment, noting that the right half of her face was eaten away by ratsor other ghouls. And I shut my eyes again when I saw what objects were being thrown asofferings to the foetid aperture or its possible local deity.
It occurred to me that judging from the elaborateness of this worship, theconcealed deity must be one of considerable importance. Was it Osiris or Isis, Horus or Anubis,or some vast unknown God of the Dead still more central and supreme? There is a legend thatterrible altars and colossi were reared to an Unknown One before ever the known gods were worshipped.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
And now, as I steeled myself to watch the rapt and sepulchral adorations ofthose nameless things, a thought of escape flashed upon me. The hall was dim, and the columnsheavy with shadow. With every creature of that nightmare throng absorbed in shocking raptures,it might be barely possible for me to creep past to the faraway end of one of the staircasesand ascend unseen; trusting to Fate and skill to deliver me from the upper reaches. Where Iwas, I neither knew nor seriously reflected upon—and for a moment it struck me as amusingto plan a serious escape from that which I knew to be a dream. Was I in some hidden and unsuspectedlower realm of Khephren’s gateway temple—that temple which generations have persistentlycalled the Temple of the Sphinx? I could not conjecture, but I resolved to ascend to life andconsciousness if wit and muscle could carry me.
Wriggling flat on my stomach, I began the anxious journey toward the foot ofthe left-hand staircase, which seemed the more accessible of the two. I cannot describe theincidents and sensations of that crawl, but they may be guessed when one reflects on whatI had to watch steadily in that malign, wind-blown torchlight in order to avoid detection.The bottom of the staircase was, as I have said, far away in shadow; as it had to be to risewithout a bend to the dizzy parapeted landing above the titanic aperture. This placed the laststages of my crawl at some distance from the noisome herd, though the spectacle chilled me evenwhen quite remote at my right.
At length I succeeded in reaching the steps and began to climb; keeping closeto the wall, on which I observed decorations of the most hideous sort, and relying for safetyon the absorbed, ecstatic interest with which the monstrosities watched the foul-breezed apertureand the impious objects of nourishment they had flung on the pavement before it. Though thestaircase was huge and steep, fashioned of vast porphyry blocks as if for the feet of a giant,the ascent seemed virtually interminable. Dread of discovery and the pain which renewed exercisehad brought to my wounds combined to make that upward crawl a thing of agonising memory. I hadintended, on reaching the landing, to climb immediately onward along whatever upper staircasemight mount from there; stopping for no last look at the carrion abominations that pawed andgenuflected some seventy or eighty feet below—yet a sudden repetition of that thunderouscorpse-gurgle and death-rattle chorus, coming as I had nearly gained the top of the flight andshewing by its ceremonial rhythm that it was not an alarm of my discovery, caused me to pauseand peer cautiously over the parapet.
The monstrosities were hailing something which had poked itself out of thenauseous aperture to seize the hellish fare proffered it. It was something quite ponderous,even as seen from my height; something yellowish and hairy, and endowed with a sort of nervousmotion. It was as large, perhaps, as a good-sized hippopotamus, but very curiously shaped. Itseemed to have no neck, but five separate shaggy heads springing in a row from a roughly cylindricaltrunk; the first very small, the second good-sized, the third and fourth equal and largest ofall, and the fifth rather small, though not so small as the first. Out of these heads dartedcurious rigid tentacles which seized ravenously on the excessively great quantities ofunmentionable food placed before the aperture. Once in a while the thing would leap up, andoccasionally it would retreat into its den in a very odd manner. Its locomotion was so inexplicablethat I stared in fascination, wishing it would emerge further from the cavernous lair beneathme.
Then it did emerge&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it did emerge, and atthe sight I turned and fled into the darkness up the higher staircase that rose behind me; fledunknowingly up incredible steps and ladders and inclined planes to which no human sight or logicguided me, and which I must ever relegate to the world of dreams for want of any confirmation.It must have been dream, or the dawn would never have found me breathing on the sands of Gizehbefore the sardonic dawn-flushed face of the Great Sphinx.
The Great Sphinx! God!—that idle question I asked myself on thatsun-blest morning before&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what huge and loathsome abnormality was theSphinx originally carven to represent? Accursed is the sight, be it in dream or not, thatrevealed to me the supreme horror—the Unknown God of the Dead, which licks its colossalchops in the unsuspected abyss, fed hideous morsels by soulless absurdities that should notexist. The five-headed monster that emerged&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that five-headed monster aslarge as a hippopotamus&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the five-headed monster—and that of which itis the merest fore paw.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
But I survived, and I know it was only a dream.
