I hate the moon—I am afraid of it—for when it shines on certain scenes familiarand loved it sometimes makes them unfamiliar and hideous.
It was in the spectral summer when the moon shone down on the old garden whereI wandered; the spectral summer of narcotic flowers and humid seas of foliage that bring wildand many-coloured dreams. And as I walked by the shallow crystal stream I saw unwonted ripplestipped with yellow light, as if those placid waters were drawn on in resistless currents tostrange oceans that are not in the world. Silent and sparkling, bright and baleful, those moon-cursedwaters hurried I knew not whither; whilst from the embowered banks white lotos blossoms flutteredone by one in the opiate night-wind and dropped despairingly into the stream, swirling awayhorribly under the arched, carven bridge, and staring back with the sinister resignation ofcalm, dead faces.
And as I ran along the shore, crushing sleeping flowers with heedless feetand maddened ever by the fear of unknown things and the lure of the dead faces, I saw that thegarden had no end under that moon; for where by day the walls were, there stretched now onlynew vistas of trees and paths, flowers and shrubs, stone idols and pagodas, and bendings ofthe yellow-litten stream past grassy banks and under grotesque bridges of marble. And the lipsof the dead lotos-faces whispered sadly, and bade me follow, nor did I cease my steps till thestream became a river, and joined amidst marshes of swaying reeds and beaches of gleaming sandthe shore of a vast and nameless sea.
Upon that sea the hateful moon shone, and over its unvocal waves weird perfumesbrooded. And as I saw therein the lotos-faces vanish, I longed for nets that I might capturethem and learn from them the secrets which the moon had brought upon the night. But when themoon went over to the west and the still tide ebbed from the sullen shore, I saw in that lightold spires that the waves almost uncovered, and white columns gay with festoons of green seaweed.And knowing that to this sunken place all the dead had come, I trembled and did not wish againto speak with the lotos-faces.
Yet when I saw afar out in the sea a black condor descend from the sky to seekrest on a vast reef, I would fain have questioned him, and asked him of those whom I had knownwhen they were alive. This I would have asked him had he not been so far away, but he was veryfar, and could not be seen at all when he drew nigh that gigantic reef.
So I watched the tide go out under that sinking moon, and saw gleaming thespires, the towers, and the roofs of that dead, dripping city. And as I watched, my nostrilstried to close against the perfume-conquering stench of the world’s dead; for truly, inthis unplaced and forgotten spot had all the flesh of the churchyards gathered for puffy sea-wormsto gnaw and glut upon.
Over those horrors the evil moon now hung very low, but the puffy worms ofthe sea need no moon to feed by. And as I watched the ripples that told of the writhing of wormsbeneath, I felt a new chill from afar out whither the condor had flown, as if my flesh had caughta horror before my eyes had seen it.
Nor had my flesh trembled without cause, for when I raised my eyes I saw thatthe waters had ebbed very low, shewing much of the vast reef whose rim I had seen before. Andwhen I saw that this reef was but the black basalt crown of a shocking eikon whose monstrousforehead now shone in the dim moonlight and whose vile hooves must paw the hellish ooze milesbelow, I shrieked and shrieked lest the hidden face rise above the waters, and lest the hiddeneyes look at me after the slinking away of that leering and treacherous yellow moon.
And to escape this relentless thing I plunged gladly and unhesitatingly intothe stinking shallows where amidst weedy walls and sunken streets fat sea-worms feast upon theworld’s dead.
