I.

The Orange Hotel stands in High Street near the railway station in Bloemfontein, South Africa.On Sunday, January 24, 1932, four men sat shivering from terror in a room on its third floor.One was George C. Titteridge, proprietor of the hotel; another was police constable Ian De Wittof the Central Station; a third was Johannes Bogaert, the local coroner; the fourth, and apparentlythe least disorganised of the group, was Dr. Cornelius Van Keulen, the coroner’s physician.
On the floor, uncomfortably evident amidst the stifling summer heat, was thebody of a dead man—but this was not what the four were afraid of. Their glances wanderedfrom the table, on which lay a curious assortment of things, to the ceiling overhead, acrosswhose smooth whiteness a series of huge, faltering alphabetical characters had somehow beenscrawled in ink; and every now and then Dr. Van Keulen would glance half-furtively at a wornleather blank-book which he held in his left hand. The horror of the four seemed about equallydivided among the blank-book, the scrawled words on the ceiling, and a dead fly of peculiaraspect which floated in a bottle of ammonia on the table. Also on the table were an open inkwell,a pen and writing-pad, a physician’s medical case, a bottle of hydrochloric acid, and atumbler about a quarter full of black oxide of manganese.
The worn leather book was the journal of the dead man on the floor, and hadat once made it clear that the name “Frederick N. Mason, Mining Properties, Toronto, Canada”,signed in the hotel register, was a false one. There were other things—terrible things—whichit likewise made clear; and still other things of far greater terror at which it hintedhideously without making them clear or even fully believable. It was the half-belief of thefour men, fostered by lives spent close to the black, settled secrets of brooding Africa, whichmade them shiver so violently in spite of the searing January heat.
The blank-book was not a large one, and the entries were in a fine handwriting,which, however, grew careless and nervous-looking toward the last. It consisted of a seriesof jottings at first rather irregularly spaced, but finally becoming daily. To call it a diarywould not be quite correct, for it chronicled only one set of its writer’s activities.Dr. Van Keulen recognised the name of the dead man the moment he opened the cover, for it wasthat of an eminent member of his own profession who had been largely connected with Africanmatters. In another moment he was horrified to find this name linked with a dastardly crime,officially unsolved, which had filled the newspapers some four months before. And the fartherhe read, the deeper grew his horror, awe, and sense of loathing and panic.
Here, in essence, is the text which the doctor read aloud in that sinisterand increasingly noisome room while the three men around him breathed hard, fidgeted in theirchairs, and darted frightened glances at the ceiling, the table, the thing on the floor, andone another:

JOURNAL OF
THOMAS SLAUENWITE, M.D.

Touching punishment of Henry Sargent Moore, Ph.D., of Brooklyn, New York, Professorof Invertebrate Biology in Columbia University, New York, N.Y. Prepared to be read after mydeath, for the satisfaction of making public the accomplishment of my revenge, which may otherwisenever be imputed to me even if it succeeds.
January 5, 1929—I have now fully resolved to kill Dr. Henry Moore, anda recent incident has shewn me how I shall do it. From now on, I shall follow a consistent lineof action; hence the beginning of this journal.
It is hardly necessary to repeat the circumstances which have driven me tothis course, for the informed part of the public is familiar with all the salient facts. I wasborn in Trenton, New Jersey, on April 12, 1885, the son of Dr. Paul Slauenwite, formerly ofPretoria, Transvaal, South Africa. Studying medicine as part of my family tradition, I was ledby my father (who died in 1916, while I was serving in France in a South African regiment) tospecialise in African fevers; and after my graduation from Columbia spent much time in researcheswhich took me from Durban, in Natal, up to the equator itself.
In Mombasa I worked out my new theory of the transmission and development ofremittent fever, aided only slightly by the papers of the late government physician, Sir NormanSloane, which I found in the house I occupied. When I published my results I became at a singlestroke a famous authority. I was told of the probability of an almost supreme position in theSouth African health service, and even a probable knighthood, in the event of my becoming anaturalised citizen, and accordingly I took the necessary steps.
Then occurred the incident for which I am about to kill Henry Moore. This man,my classmate and friend of years in America and Africa, chose deliberately to undermine my claimto my own theory; alleging that Sir Norman Sloane had anticipated me in every essential detail,and implying that I had probably found more of his papers than I had stated in my account ofthe matter. To buttress this absurd accusation he produced certain personal letters from SirNorman which indeed shewed that the older man had been over my ground, and that he would havepublished his results very soon but for his sudden death. This much I could only admit withregret. What I could not excuse was the jealous suspicion that I had stolen the theory fromSir Norman’s papers. The British government, sensibly enough, ignored these aspersions,but withheld the half-promised appointment and knighthood on the ground that my theory, whileoriginal with me, was not in fact new.
I could soon see that my career in Africa was perceptibly checked; though Ihad placed all my hopes on such a career, even to the point of resigning American citizenship.A distinct coolness toward me had arisen among the Government set in Mombasa, especially amongthose who had known Sir Norman. It was then that I resolved to be even with Moore sooner orlater, though I did not know how. He had been jealous of my early celebrity, and had taken advantageof his old correspondence with Sir Norman to ruin me. This from the friend whom I had myselfled to take an interest in Africa—whom I had coached and inspired till he achieved hispresent moderate fame as an authority on African entomology. Even now, though, I will not denythat his attainments are profound. I made him, and in return he has ruined me. Now—someday—I shall destroy him.
When I saw myself losing ground in Mombasa, I applied for my present situationin the interior—at M’gonga, only fifty miles from the Uganda line. It is a cottonand ivory trading-post, with only eight white men besides myself. A beastly hole, almost onthe equator, and full of every sort of fever known to mankind. Poisonous snakes and insectseverywhere, and niggers with diseases nobody ever heard of outside medical college. But my workis not hard, and I have always had plenty of time to plan things to do to Henry Moore. It amusesme to give his Diptera of Central and Southern Africa a prominent place on my shelf.I suppose it actually is a standard manual—they use it at Columbia, Harvard, and the U.of Wis.—but my own suggestions are really responsible for half its strong points.
Last week I encountered the thing which decided me how to kill Moore. A partyfrom Uganda brought in a black with a queer illness which I can’t yet diagnose. He waslethargic, with a very low temperature, and shuffled in a peculiar way. Most of the others wereafraid of him and said he was under some kind of witch-doctor spell; but Gobo, the interpreter,said he had been bitten by an insect. What it was, I can’t imagine—for there is onlya slight puncture on the arm. It is bright red, though, with a purple ring around it. Spectral-looking—Idon’t wonder the boys lay it to black magic. They seem to have seen cases like it before,and say there’s really nothing to do about it.
Old N’Kuru, one of the Galla boys at the post, says it must be the biteof a devil-fly, which makes its victim waste away gradually and die, and then takes hold ofhis soul and personality if it is still alive itself—flying around with all his likes,dislikes, and consciousness. A queer legend—and I don’t know of any local insect deadlyenough to account for it. I gave this sick black—his name is Mevana—a good shot ofquinine and took a sample of his blood for testing, but haven’t made much progress. Thereis certainly a strange germ present, but I can’t even remotely identify it. The nearestthing to it is the bacillus one finds in oxen, horses, and dogs that the tsetse-fly has bitten;but tsetse-flies don’t infect human beings, and this is too far north for them anyway.
However—the important thing is that I’ve decided how to kill Moore.If this interior region has insects as poisonous as the natives say, I’ll see that he getsa shipment of them from a source he won’t suspect, and with plenty of assurances that theyare harmless. Trust him to throw overboard all caution when it comes to studying an unknownspecies—and then we’ll see how Nature takes its course! It ought not to be hard tofind an insect that scares the blacks so much. First to see how poor Mevana turns out—andthen to find my envoy of death.
Jan. 7—Mevana is no better, though I have injected all the antitoxinsI know of. He has fits of trembling, in which he rants affrightedly about the way his soul willpass when he dies into the insect that bit him, but between them he remains in a kind of half-stupor.Heart action still strong, so I may pull him through. I shall try to, for he can probably guideme better than anyone else to the region where he was bitten.
Meanwhile I’ll write to Dr. Lincoln, my predecessor here, for Allen, thehead factor, says he had a profound knowledge of the local sicknesses. He ought to know aboutthe death-fly if any white man does. He’s at Nairobi now, and a black runner ought to getme a reply in a week—using the railway for half the trip.
Jan. 10—Patient unchanged, but I have found what I want! It was in anold volume of the local health records, which I’ve been going over diligently while waitingto hear from Lincoln. Thirty years ago there was an epidemic that killed off thousands of nativesin Uganda, and it was definitely traced to a rare fly called Glossina palpalis—asort of cousin of the Glossina marsitans, or tsetse. It lives in the bushes on the shoresof lakes and rivers, and feeds on the blood of crocodiles, antelopes, and large mammals. Whenthese food animals have the germ of trypanosomiasis, or sleeping-sickness, it picks it up anddevelops acute infectivity after an incubation period of thirty-one days. Then for seventy-fivedays it is sure death to anyone or anything it bites.
Without doubt, this must be the “devil-fly” the niggers talk about.Now I know what I’m heading for. Hope Mevana pulls through. Ought to hear from Lincolnin four or five days—he has a great reputation for success in things like this. My worstproblem will be to get the flies to Moore without his recognising them. With his cursed ploddingscholarship it would be just like him to know all about them since they’re actually onrecord.
Jan. 15—Just heard from Lincoln, who confirms all that the records sayabout Glossina palpalis. He has a remedy for sleeping-sickness which has succeeded ina great number of cases when not given too late. Intermuscular injections of tryparsamide. SinceMevana was bitten about two months ago, I don’t know how it will work—but Lincolnsays that cases have been known to drag on eighteen months, so possibly I’m not too late.Lincoln sent over some of his stuff, so I’ve just given Mevana a stiff shot. In a stupornow. They’ve brought his principal wife from the village, but he doesn’t even recogniseher. If he recovers, he can certainly shew me where the flies are. He’s a great crocodilehunter, according to report, and knows all Uganda like a book. I’ll give him another shottomorrow.
Jan. 16—Mevana seems a little brighter today, but his heart action isslowing up a bit. I’ll keep up the injections, but not overdo them.
Jan. 17—Recovery really pronounced today. Mevana opened his eyes and shewedsigns of actual consciousness, though dazed, after the injection. Hope Moore doesn’t knowabout tryparsamide. There’s a good chance he won’t, since he never leaned much towardmedicine. Mevana’s tongue seemed paralysed, but I fancy that will pass off if I can onlywake him up. Wouldn’t mind a good sleep myself, but not of this kind!
Jan. 25—Mevana nearly cured! In another week I can let him take me intothe jungle. He was frightened when he first came to—about having the fly take his personalityafter he died—but brightened up finally when I told him he was going to get well. His wife,Ugowe, takes good care of him now, and I can rest a bit. Then for the envoys of death!
Feb. 3—Mevana is well now, and I have talked with him about a hunt forflies. He dreads to go near the place where they got him, but I am playing on his gratitude.Besides, he has an idea that I can ward off disease as well as cure it. His pluck would shamea white man—there’s no doubt that he’ll go. I can get off by telling the headfactor the trip is in the interest of local health work.
March 12—In Uganda at last! Have five boys besides Mevana, but they areall Gallas. The local blacks couldn’t be hired to come near the region after the talk ofwhat had happened to Mevana. This jungle is a pestilential place—steaming with miasmalvapours. All the lakes look stagnant. In one spot we came upon a trace of Cyclopean ruins whichmade even the Gallas run past in a wide circle. They say these megaliths are older than man,and that they used to be a haunt or outpost of “The Fishers from Outside”—whateverthat means—and of the evil gods Tsadogwa and Clulu. To this day they are said to have amalign influence, and to be connected somehow with the devil-flies.
March 15—Struck Lake Mlolo this morning—where Mevana was bitten.A hellish, green-scummed affair, full of crocodiles. Mevana has fixed up a fly-trap of finewire netting baited with crocodile meat. It has a small entrance, and once the quarry get in,they don’t know enough to get out. As stupid as they are deadly, and ravenous for freshmeat or a bowl of blood. Hope we can get a good supply. I’ve decided that I must experimentwith them—finding a way to change their appearance so that Moore won’t recognise them.Possibly I can cross them with some other species, producing a strange hybrid whose infection-carryingcapacity will be undiminished. We’ll see. I must wait, but am in no hurry now. When I getready I’ll have Mevana get me some infected meat to feed my envoys of death—and thenfor the post-office. Ought to be no trouble getting infection, for this country is a veritablepest-hole.
March 16—Good luck. Two cages full. Five vigorous specimens with wingsglistening like diamonds. Mevana is emptying them into a large can with a tightly meshed top,and I think we caught them in the nick of time. We can get them to M’gonga without trouble.Taking plenty of crocodile meat for their food. Undoubtedly all or most of it is infected.
April 20—Back at M’gonga and busy in the laboratory. Have sent toDr. Joost in Pretoria for some tsetse-flies for hybridisation experiments. Such a crossing,if it will work at all, ought to produce something pretty hard to recognise yet at the sametime just as deadly as the palpalis. If this doesn’t work, I shall try certain otherdiptera from the interior, and I have sent to Dr. Vandervelde at Nyangwe for some of the Congotypes. I shan’t have to send Mevana for more tainted meat after all; for I find I can keepcultures of the germ Trypanosoma gambiense, taken from the meat we got last month, almostindefinitely in tubes. When the time comes, I’ll taint some fresh meat and feed my wingedenvoys a good dose—then bon voyage to them!
June 18—My tsetse-flies from Joost came today. Cages for breeding wereall ready long ago, and I am now making selections. Intend to use ultra-violet rays to speedup the life-cycle. Fortunately I have the needed apparatus in my regular equipment. NaturallyI tell no one what I’m doing. The ignorance of the few men here makes it easy for me toconceal my aims and pretend to be merely studying existing species for medical reasons.
June 29—The crossing is fertile! Good deposits of eggs last Wednesday,and now I have some excellent larvae. If the mature insects look as strange as these do, I needdo nothing more. Am preparing separate numbered cages for the different specimens.
July 7—New hybrids are out! Disguise is excellent as to shape, but sheenof wings still suggests palpalis. Thorax has faint suggestions of the stripes of thetsetse. Slight variation in individuals. Am feeding them all on tainted crocodile meat, andafter infectivity develops will try them on some of the blacks—apparently, of course, byaccident. There are so many mildly venomous flies around here that it can easily be done withoutexciting suspicion. I shall loose an insect in my tightly screened dining-room when Batta, myhouse-boy, brings in breakfast—keeping well on guard myself. When it has done its workI’ll capture or swat it—an easy thing because of its stupidity—or asphyxiateit by filling the room with chlorine gas. If it doesn’t work the first time, I’lltry again until it does. Of course, I’ll have the tryparsamide handy in case I get bittenmyself—but I shall be careful to avoid biting, for no antidote is really certain.
Aug. 10—Infectivity mature, and managed to get Batta stung in fine shape.Caught the fly on him, returning it to its cage. Eased up the pain with iodine, and the poordevil is quite grateful for the service. Shall try a variant specimen on Gamba, the factor’smessenger, tomorrow. That will be all the tests I shall dare to make here, but if I need moreI shall take some specimens to Ukala and get additional data.
Aug. 11—Failed to get Gamba, but recaptured the fly alive. Batta stillseems as well as usual, and has no pain in the back where he was stung. Shall wait before tryingto get Gamba again.
Aug. 14—Shipment of insects from Vandervelde at last. Fully seven distinctspecies, some more or less poisonous. Am keeping them well fed in case the tsetse crossing doesn’twork. Some of these fellows look very unlike the palpalis, but the trouble is that theymay not make a fertile cross with it.
Aug. 17—Got Gamba this afternoon, but had to kill the fly on him. It nippedhim in the left shoulder. I dressed the bite, and Gamba is as grateful as Batta was. No changein Batta.
Aug. 20—Gamba unchanged so far—Batta too. Am experimenting with anew form of disguise to supplement the hybridisation—some sort of dye to change the telltaleglitter of the palpalis’ wings. A bluish tint would be best—something I couldspray on a whole batch of insects. Shall begin by investigating things like Prussian and Turnbull’sblue—iron and cyanogen salts.
Aug. 25—Batta complained of a pain in his back today—things may bedeveloping.
Sept. 3—Have made fair progress in my experiments. Batta shews signs oflethargy, and says his back aches all the time. Gamba beginning to feel uneasy in his bittenshoulder.
Sept. 24—Batta worse and worse, and beginning to get frightened abouthis bite. Thinks it must be a devil-fly, and entreated me to kill it—for he saw me cageit—until I pretended to him that it had died long ago. Said he didn’t want his soulto pass into it upon his death. I give him shots of plain water with a hypodermic to keep hismorale up. Evidently the fly retains all the properties of the palpalis. Gamba down,too, and repeating all of Batta’s symptoms. I may decide to give him a chance with tryparsamide,for the effect of the fly is proved well enough. I shall let Batta go on, however, for I wanta rough idea of how long it takes to finish a case.
Dye experiments coming along finely. An isomeric form of ferrous ferrocyanide,with some admixture of potassium salts, can be dissolved in alcohol and sprayed on the insectswith splendid effect. It stains the wings blue without affecting the dark thorax much, and doesn’twear off when I sprinkle the specimens with water. With this disguise, I think I can use thepresent tsetse hybrids and avoid bothering with any more experiments. Sharp as he is, Moorecouldn’t recognise a blue-winged fly with a half-tsetse thorax. Of course, I keep all thisdye business strictly under cover. Nothing must ever connect me with the blue flies later on.
Oct. 9—Batta is lethargic and has taken to his bed. Have been giving Gambatryparsamide for two weeks, and fancy he’ll recover.
Oct. 25—Batta very low, but Gamba nearly well.
Nov. 18—Batta died yesterday, and a curious thing happened which gaveme a real shiver in view of the native legends and Batta’s own fears. When I returned tothe laboratory after the death I heard the most singular buzzing and thrashing in cage 12, whichcontained the fly that bit Batta. The creature seemed frantic, but stopped still when I appeared—lightingon the wire netting and looking at me in the oddest way. It reached its legs through the wiresas if it were bewildered. When I came back from dining with Allen, the thing was dead. Evidentlyit had gone wild and beaten its life out on the sides of the cage.
It certainly is peculiar that this should happen just as Batta died. If anyblack had seen it, he’d have laid it at once to the absorption of the poor devil’ssoul. I shall start my blue-stained hybrids on their way before long now. The hybrid’srate of killing seems a little ahead of the pure palpalis’ rate, if anything. Battadied three months and eight days after infection—but of course there is always a wide marginof uncertainty. I almost wish I had let Gamba’s case run on.
Dec. 5—Busy planning how to get my envoys to Moore. I must have them appearto come from some disinterested entomologist who has read his Diptera of Central and SouthernAfrica and believes he would like to study this “new and unidentifiable species”.There must also be ample assurances that the blue-winged fly is harmless, as proved by the natives’long experience. Moore will be off his guard, and one of the flies will surely get him sooneror later—though one can’t tell just when.
I’ll have to rely on the letters of New York friends—they still speakof Moore from time to time—to keep me informed of early results, though I dare say thepapers will announce his death. Above all, I must shew no interest in his case. I shall mailthe flies while on a trip, but must not be recognised when I do it. The best plan will be totake a long vacation in the interior, grow a beard, mail the package at Ukala while passingas a visiting entomologist, and return here after shaving off the beard.
April 12, 1930—Back in M’gonga after my long trip. Everything hascome off finely—with clockwork precision. Have sent the flies to Moore without leavinga trace. Got a Christmas vacation Dec. 15th, and set out at once with the proper stuff. Madea very good mailing container with room to include some germ-tainted crocodile meat as foodfor the envoys. By the end of February I had beard enough to shape into a close Vandyke.
Shewed up at Ukala March 9th and typed a letter to Moore on the trading-postmachine. Signed it “Nevil Wayland-Hall”—supposed to be an entomologist from London.Think I took just the right tone—interest of a brother-scientist, and all that. Was artisticallycasual in emphasising the “complete harmlessness” of the specimens. Nobody suspectedanything. Shaved the beard as soon as I hit the bush, so that there wouldn’t be any uneventanning by the time I got back here. Dispensed with native bearers except for one small stretchof swamp—I can do wonders with one knapsack, and my sense of direction is good. Lucky I’mused to such travelling. Explained my protracted absence by pleading a touch of fever and somemistakes in direction when going through the bush.
But now comes the hardest part psychologically—waiting for news of Moorewithout shewing the strain. Of course, he may possibly escape a bite until the venom is playedout—but with his recklessness the chances are one hundred to one against him. I have noregrets; after what he did to me, he deserves this and more.
June 30, 1930—Hurrah! The first step worked! Just heard casually fromDyson of Columbia that Moore had received some new blue-winged flies from Africa, and that heis badly puzzled over them! No word of any bite—but if I know Moore’s slipshod waysas I think I do, there’ll be one before long!
August 27, 1930—Letter from Morton in Cambridge. He says Moore writesof feeling very run-down, and tells of an insect bite on the back of his neck—from a curiousnew specimen that he received about the middle of June. Have I succeeded? Apparently Moore doesn’tconnect the bite with his weakness. If this is the real stuff, then Moore was bitten well withinthe insect’s period of infectivity.
Sept. 12, 1930—Victory! Another line from Dyson says that Moore is reallyin an alarming shape. He now traces his illness to the bite, which he received around noon onJune 19, and is quite bewildered about the identity of the insect. Is trying to get in touchwith the “Nevil Wayland-Hall” who sent him the shipment. Of the hundred-odd that Isent, about twenty-five seem to have reached him alive. Some escaped at the time of the bite,but several larvae have appeared from eggs laid since the time of mailing. He is, Dyson says,carefully incubating these larvae. When they mature I suppose he’ll identify the tsetse-palpalishybridisation—but that won’t do him much good now. He’ll wonder, though, whythe blue wings aren’t transmitted by heredity!
Nov. 8, 1930—Letters from half a dozen friends tell of Moore’s seriousillness. Dyson’s came today. He says Moore is utterly at sea about the hybrids that camefrom the larvae and is beginning to think that the parents got their blue wings in some artificialway. Has to stay in bed most of the time now. No mention of using tryparsamide.
Feb. 13, 1931—Not so good! Moore is sinking, and seems to know no remedy,but I think he suspects me. Had a very chilly letter from Morton last month, which told nothingof Moore; and now Dyson writes—also rather constrainedly—that Moore is forming theoriesabout the whole matter. He’s been making a search for “Wayland-Hall” by telegraph—atLondon, Ukala, Nairobi, Mombasa, and other places—and of course finds nothing. I judgethat he’s told Dyson whom he suspects, but that Dyson doesn’t believe it yet. FearMorton does believe it.
I see that I’d better lay plans for getting out of here and effacing myidentity for good. What an end to a career that started out so well! More of Moore’s work—butthis time he’s paying for it in advance! Believe I’ll go back to South Africa—andmeanwhile will quietly deposit funds there to the credit of my new self—“FrederickNasmyth Mason of Toronto, Canada, broker in mining properties”. Will establish a new signaturefor identification. If I never have to take the step, I can easily re-transfer the funds tomy present self.
Aug. 15, 1931—Half a year gone, and still suspense. Dyson and Morton—aswell as several other friends—seem to have stopped writing me. Dr. James of San Franciscohears from Moore’s friends now and then, and says Moore is in an almost continuous coma.He hasn’t been able to walk since May. As long as he could talk he complained of beingcold. Now he can’t talk, though it is thought he still has glimmers of consciousness. Hisbreathing is short and quick, and can be heard some distance away. No question but that Trypanosomagambiense is feeding on him—but he holds out better than the niggers around here. Threemonths and eight days finished Batta, and here Moore is alive over a year after his biting.Heard rumours last month of an intensive search around Ukala for “Wayland-Hall”. Don’tthink I need to worry yet, though, for there’s absolutely nothing in existence to linkme with this business.
Oct. 7, 1931—It’s over at last! News in the Mombasa Gazette.Moore died September 20 after a series of trembling fits and with a temperature vastly belownormal. So much for that! I said I’d get him, and I did! The paper had a three-column reportof his long illness and death, and of the futile search for “Wayland-Hall”. Obviously,Moore was a bigger character in Africa than I had realised. The insect that bit him has nowbeen fully identified from the surviving specimens and developed larvae, and the wing-stainingis also detected. It is universally realised that the flies were prepared and shipped with intentto kill. Moore, it appears, communicated certain suspicions to Dyson, but the latter—andthe police—are maintaining secrecy because of absence of proof. All of Moore’s enemiesare being looked up, and the Associated Press hints that “an investigation, possibly involvingan eminent physician now abroad, will follow”.
One thing at the very end of the report—undoubtedly, the cheap romancingof a yellow journalist—gives me a curious shudder in view of the legends of the blacksand the way the fly happened to go wild when Batta died. It seems that an odd incident occurredon the night of Moore’s death; Dyson having been aroused by the buzzing of a blue-wingedfly—which immediately flew out the window—just before the nurse telephoned the deathnews from Moore’s home, miles away in Brooklyn.
But what concerns me most is the African end of the matter. People at Ukalaremember the bearded stranger who typed the letter and sent the package, and the constabularyare combing the country for any blacks who may have carried him. I didn’t use many, butif officers question the Ubandes who took me through N’Kini jungle belt I’ll havemore to explain than I like. It looks as if the time has come for me to vanish; so tomorrowI believe I’ll resign and prepare to start for parts unknown.
Nov. 9, 1931—Hard work getting my resignation acted on, but release cametoday. I didn’t want to aggravate suspicion by decamping outright. Last week I heard fromJames about Moore’s death—but nothing more than is in the papers. Those around himin New York seem rather reticent about details, though they all talk about a searching investigation.No word from any of my friends in the East. Moore must have spread some dangerous suspicionsaround before he lost consciousness—but there isn’t an iota of proof he could haveadduced.
Still, I am taking no chances. On Thursday I shall start for Mombasa, and whenthere will take a steamer down the coast to Durban. After that I shall drop from sight—butsoon afterward the mining properties’ broker Frederick Nasmyth Mason, from Toronto, willturn up in Johannesburg.
Let this be the end of my journal. If in the end I am not suspected, it willserve its original purpose after my death and reveal what would otherwise not be known. If,on the other hand, these suspicions do materialise and persist, it will confirm and clarifythe vague charges, and fill in many important and puzzling gaps. Of course, if danger comesmy way I shall have to destroy it.
Well, Moore is dead—as he amply deserves to be. Now Dr. Thomas Slauenwiteis dead, too. And when the body formerly belonging to Thomas Slauenwite is dead, the publicmay have this record.

II.

Jan. 15, 1932—A new year—and a reluctant reopening of this journal.This time I am writing solely to relieve my mind, for it would be absurd to fancy that the caseis not definitely closed. I am settled in the Vaal Hotel, Johannesburg, under my new name, andno one has so far challenged my identity. Have had some inconclusive business talks to keepup my part as a mine broker, and believe I may actually work myself into that business. LaterI shall go to Toronto and plant a few evidences for my fictitious past.
But what is bothering me is an insect that invaded my room around noon today.Of course I have had all sorts of nightmares about blue flies of late, but those were only tobe expected in view of my prevailing nervous strain. This thing, however, was a waking actuality,and I am utterly at a loss to account for it. It buzzed around my bookshelf for fully a quarterof an hour, and eluded every attempt to catch or kill it. The queerest thing was its colourand aspect—for it had blue wings and was in every way a duplicate of my hybrid envoys ofdeath. How it could possibly be one of these, in fact, I certainly don’t know. I disposedof all the hybrids—stained and unstained—that I didn’t send to Moore, and can’trecall any instance of escape.
Can this be wholly an hallucination? Or could any of the specimens that escapedin Brooklyn when Moore was bitten have found their way back to Africa? There was that absurdstory of the blue fly that waked Dyson when Moore died—but after all, the survival andreturn of some of the things is not impossible. It is perfectly plausible that the blue shouldstick to their wings, too, for the pigment I devised was almost as good as tattooing for permanence.By elimination, that would seem to be the only rational explanation for this thing; though itis very curious that the fellow has come as far south as this. Possibly it’s some hereditaryhoming instinct inherent in the tsetse strain. After all, that side of him belongs to SouthAfrica.
I must be on my guard against a bite. Of course the original venom—ifthis is actually one of the flies that escaped from Moore—was worn out ages ago; but thefellow must have fed as he flew back from America, and he may well have come through CentralAfrica and picked up a fresh infectivity. Indeed, that’s more probable than not; for thepalpalis half of his heredity would naturally take him back to Uganda, and all the trypanosomiasisgerms. I still have some of the tryparsamide left—I couldn’t bear to destroy my medicinecase, incriminating though it may be—but since reading up on the subject I am not so sureabout the drug’s action as I was. It gives one a fighting chance—certainly it savedGamba—but there’s always a large probability of failure.
It’s devilish queer that this fly should have happened to come into myroom—of all places in the wide expanse of Africa! Seems to strain coincidence to the breaking-point.I suppose that if it comes again, I shall certainly kill it. I’m surprised that it escapedme today, for ordinarily these fellows are extremely stupid and easy to catch. Can it be a pureillusion after all? Certainly the heat is getting me of late as it never did before—evenup around Uganda.
Jan. 16—Am I going insane? The fly came again this noon, and acted soanomalously that I can’t make head or tail of it. Only delusion on my part could accountfor what that buzzing pest seemed to do. It appeared from nowhere, and went straight to my bookshelf—circlingagain and again to front a copy of Moore’s Diptera of Central and Southern Africa.Now and then it would light on top or back of the volume, and occasionally it would dart forwardtoward me and retreat before I could strike at it with a folded paper. Such cunning is unheardof among the notoriously stupid African diptera. For nearly half an hour I tried to get thecursed thing, but at last it darted out the window through a hole in the screen that I hadn’tnoticed. At times I fancied it deliberately mocked me by coming within reach of my weapon andthen skilfully sidestepping as I struck out. I must keep a tight hold of my consciousness.
Jan. 17—Either I am mad or the world is in the grip of some sudden suspensionof the laws of probability as we know them. That damnable fly came in from somewhere just beforenoon and commenced buzzing around the copy of Moore’s Diptera on my shelf. AgainI tried to catch it, and again yesterday’s experience was repeated. Finally the pest madefor the open inkwell on my table and dipped itself in—just the legs and thorax, keepingits wings clear. Then it sailed up to the ceiling and lit—beginning to crawl around ina curved patch and leaving a trail of ink. After a time it hopped a bit and made a single inkspot unconnected with the trail—then it dropped squarely in front of my face, and buzzedout of sight before I could get it.
Something about this whole business struck me as monstrously sinister and abnormal—moreso than I could explain to myself. When I looked at the ink-trail on the ceiling from differentangles, it seemed more and more familiar to me, and it dawned on me suddenly that it formedan absolutely perfect question-mark. What device could be more malignly appropriate? It is awonder that I did not faint. So far the hotel attendants have not noticed it. Have not seenthe fly this afternoon and evening, but am keeping my inkwell securely closed. I think my exterminationof Moore must be preying on me, and giving me morbid hallucinations. Perhaps there is no flyat all.
Jan. 18—Into what strange hell of living nightmare am I plunged? Whatoccurred today is something which could not normally happen—and yet an hotel attendanthas seen the marks on the ceiling and concedes their reality. About eleven o’clockthis morning, as I was writing on a manuscript, something darted down to the inkwell for a secondand flashed aloft again before I could see what it was. Looking up, I saw that hellish fly onthe ceiling as it had been before—crawling along and tracing another trail of curves andturns. There was nothing I could do, but I folded a newspaper in readiness to get the creatureif it should fly near enough. When it had made several turns on the ceiling it flew into a darkcorner and disappeared, and as I looked upward at the doubly defaced plastering I saw that thenew ink-trail was that of a huge and unmistakable figure 5!
For a time I was almost unconscious from a wave of nameless menace for whichI could not fully account. Then I summoned up my resolution and took an active step. Going outto a chemist’s shop I purchased some gum and other things necessary for preparing a stickytrap—also a duplicate inkwell. Returning to my room, I filled the new inkwell with thesticky mixture and set it where the old one had been, leaving it open. Then I tried to concentratemy mind on some reading. About three o’clock I heard the accursed insect again, and sawit circling around the new inkwell. It descended to the sticky surface but did not touch it,and afterward sailed straight toward me—retreating before I could hit it. Then it wentto the bookshelf and circled around Moore’s treatise. There is something profound and diabolicabout the way the intruder hovers near that book.
The worst part was the last. Leaving Moore’s book, the insect flew overto the open window and began beating itself rhythmically against the wire screen. There wouldbe a series of beats and then a series of equal length and another pause, and so on. Somethingabout this performance held me motionless for a couple of moments, but after that I went overto the window and tried to kill the noxious thing. As usual, no use. It merely flew across theroom to a lamp and began beating the same tattoo on the stiff cardboard shade. I felt a vaguedesperation, and proceeded to shut all the doors as well as the window whose screen had theimperceptible hole. It seemed very necessary to kill this persistent being, whose hounding wasrapidly unseating my mind. Then, unconsciously counting, I began to notice that each of itsseries of beatings contained just five strokes.
Five—the same number that the thing had traced in ink on the ceiling inthe morning! Could there be any conceivable connexion? The notion was maniacal, for that wouldargue a human intellect and a knowledge of written figures in the hybrid fly. A human intellect—didnot that take one back to the most primitive legends of the Uganda blacks? And yet there wasthat infernal cleverness in eluding me as contrasted with the normal stupidity of the breed.As I laid aside my folded paper and sat down in growing horror, the insect buzzed aloft anddisappeared through a hole in the ceiling where the radiator pipe went to the room above.
The departure did not soothe me, for my mind had started on a train of wildand terrible reflections. If this fly had a human intelligence, where did that intelligencecome from? Was there any truth in the native notion that these creatures acquire the personalityof their victims after the latter’s death? If so, whose personality did this fly bear?I had reasoned out that it must be one of those which escaped from Moore at the time he wasbitten. Was this the envoy of death which had bitten Moore? If so, what did it want withme? What did it want with me anyway? In a cold perspiration I remembered the actions ofthe fly that had bitten Batta when Batta died. Had its own personality been displaced by thatof its dead victim? Then there was that sensational news account of the fly that waked Dysonwhen Moore died. As for that fly that was hounding me—could it be that a vindictive humanpersonality drove it on? How it hovered around Moore’s book!—I refused to think anyfarther than that. All at once I began to feel sure that the creature was indeed infected, andin the most virulent way. With a malign deliberation so evident in every act, it must surelyhave charged itself on purpose with the deadliest bacilli in all Africa. My mind, thoroughlyshaken, was now taking the thing’s human qualities for granted.
I now telephoned the clerk and asked for a man to stop up the radiator pipeholeand other possible chinks in my room. I spoke of being tormented by flies, and he seemed tobe quite sympathetic. When the man came, I shewed him the ink-marks on the ceiling, which herecognised without difficulty. So they are real! The resemblance to a question-mark and a figure5 puzzled and fascinated him. In the end he stopped up all the holes he could find, and mendedthe window-screen, so that I can now keep both windows open. He evidently thought me a bit eccentric,especially since no insects were in sight while he was here. But I am past minding that. Sofar the fly has not appeared this evening. God knows what it is, what it wants, or what willbecome of me!
Jan. 19—I am utterly engulfed in horror. The thing has touched me.Something monstrous and daemoniac is at work around me, and I am a helpless victim. In the morning,when I returned from breakfast, that winged fiend from hell brushed into the room over my head,and began beating itself against the window-screen as it did yesterday. This time, though, eachseries of beats contained only four strokes. I rushed to the window and tried to catchit, but it escaped as usual and flew over to Moore’s treatise, where it buzzed around mockingly.Its vocal equipment is limited, but I noticed that its spells of buzzing came in groups of four.
By this time I was certainly mad, for I called out to it, “Moore, Moore,for God’s sake, what do you want?” When I did so, the creature suddenly ceasedits circling, flew toward me, and made a low, graceful dip in the air, somehow suggestive ofa bow. Then it flew back to the book. At least, I seemed to see it do all this—thoughI am trusting my senses no longer.
And then the worst thing happened. I had left my door open, hoping the monsterwould leave if I could not catch it; but about 11:30 I shut the door, concluding it had gone.Then I settled down to read. Just at noon I felt a tickling on the back of my neck, but whenI put my hand up nothing was there. In a moment I felt the tickling again—and before Icould move, that nameless spawn of hell sailed into view from behind, did another of those mocking,graceful dips in the air, and flew out through the keyhole—which I had never dreamed waslarge enough to allow its passage.
That the thing had touched me, I could not doubt. It had touched me withoutinjuring me—and then I remembered in a sudden cold fright that Moore had been bitten onthe back of the neck at noon. No invasion since then—but I have stuffed all thekeyholes with paper and shall have a folded paper ready for use whenever I open the door toleave or enter.
Jan. 20—I cannot yet believe fully in the supernatural, yet I fear nonethe less that I am lost. The business is too much for me. Just before noon today that devilappeared outside the window and repeated its beating operations; but this time in seriesof three. When I went to the window it flew off out of sight. I still have resolutionenough to take one more defensive step. Removing both window-screens, I coated them with mysticky preparation—the one I used in the inkwell—outside and inside, and set themback in place. If that creature attempts another tattoo, it will be its last!
Rest of the day in peace. Can I weather this experience without becoming amaniac?
Jan. 21—On board train for Bloemfontein.
I am routed. The thing is winning. It has a diabolic intelligence against whichall my devices are powerless. It appeared outside the window this morning, but did not touchthe sticky screen. Instead, it sheered off without lighting and began buzzing around incircles—two at a time, followed by a pause in the air. After several of these performancesit flew off out of sight over the roofs of the city. My nerves are just about at the breaking-point,for these suggestions of numbers are capable of a hideous interpretation. Monday thething dwelt on the figure five; Tuesday it was four; Wednesday it was three;and now today it is two. Five, four, three, two—what can this be save some monstrousand unthinkable counting-off of days? For what purpose, only the evil powers of the universecan know. I spent all the afternoon packing and arranging about my trunks, and now I have takenthe night express for Bloemfontein. Flight may be useless, but what else can one do?
Jan. 22—Settled at the Orange Hotel, Bloemfontein—a comfortable andexcellent place—but the horror followed me. I had shut all the doors and windows, stoppedall the keyholes, looked for any possible chinks, and pulled down all the shades—but justbefore noon I heard a dull tap on one of the window-screens. I waited—and after a longpause another tap came. A second pause, and still another single tap. Raising the shade, I sawthat accursed fly, as I had expected. It described one large, slow circle in the air, and thenflew out of sight. I was left as weak as a rag, and had to rest on the couch. One! Thiswas clearly the burden of the monster’s present message. One tap, one circle.Did this mean one more day for me before some unthinkable doom? Ought I to flee again,or entrench myself here by sealing up the room?
After an hour’s rest I felt able to act, and ordered a large reserve supplyof canned and packaged food—also linen and towels—sent in. Tomorrow I shall not underany circumstances open any crevice of door or window. When the food and linen came the blacklooked at me queerly, but I no longer care how eccentric—or insane—I may appear. Iam hounded by powers worse than the ridicule of mankind. Having received my supplies, I wentover every square millimeter of the walls, and stopped up every microscopic opening I couldfind. At last I feel able to get real sleep.
[Handwriting here becomes irregular, nervous, and very difficult to decipher.]
Jan. 23—It is just before noon, and I feel that something very terribleis about to happen. Didn’t sleep as late as I expected, even though I got almost no sleepon the train the night before. Up early, and have had trouble getting concentrated on anything—readingor writing. That slow, deliberate counting-off of days is too much for me. I don’t knowwhich has gone wild—Nature or my head. Until about eleven I did very little except walkup and down the room.
Then I heard a rustle among the food packages brought in yesterday, and thatdaemoniac fly crawled out before my eyes. I grabbed something flat and made passes at the thingdespite my panic fear, but with no more effect than usual. As I advanced, that blue-winged horrorretreated as usual to the table where I had piled my books, and lit for a second on Moore’sDiptera of Central and Southern Africa. Then as I followed, it flew over to the mantelclock and lit on the dial near the figure 12. Before I could think up another move it had begunto crawl around the dial very slowly and deliberately—in the direction of the hands. Itpassed under the minute hand, curved down and up, passed under the hour hand, and finally cameto a stop exactly at the figure 12. As it hovered there it fluttered its wings with a buzzingnoise.
Is this a portent of some sort? I am getting as superstitious as the blacks.The hour is now a little after eleven. Is twelve the end? I have just one last resort, broughtto my mind through utter desperation. Wish I had thought of it before. Recalling that my medicinecase contains both of the substances necessary to generate chlorine gas, I have resolved tofill the room with that lethal vapour—asphyxiating the fly while protecting myself withan ammonia-sealed handkerchief tied over my face. Fortunately I have a good supply of ammonia.This crude mask will probably neutralise the acrid chlorine fumes till the insect is dead—orat least helpless enough to crush. But I must be quick. How can I be sure that the thing willnot suddenly dart for me before my preparations are complete? I ought not to be stopping towrite in this journal.
Later—Both chemicals—hydrochloric acid and manganese dioxide—onthe table all ready to mix. I’ve tied the handkerchief over my nose and mouth, and havea bottle of ammonia ready to keep it soaked until the chlorine is gone. Have battened down bothwindows. But I don’t like the actions of that hybrid daemon. It stays on the clock, butis very slowly crawling around backward from the 12 mark to meet the gradually advancing minute-hand.
Is this to be my last entry in this journal? It would be useless to try todeny what I suspect. Too often a grain of incredible truth lurks behind the wildest and mostfantastic of legends. Is the personality of Henry Moore trying to get at me through this blue-wingeddevil? Is this the fly that bit him, and that in consequence absorbed his consciousness whenhe died? If so, and if it bites me, will my own personality displace Moore’s and enterthat buzzing body when I die of the bite later on? Perhaps, though, I need not die even if itgets me. There is always a chance with tryparsamide. And I regret nothing. Moore had to die,be the outcome what it will.
Slightly later.
The fly has paused on the clock-dial near the 45-minute mark. It is now 11:30.I am saturating the handkerchief over my face with ammonia, and keeping the bottle handy forfurther applications. This will be the final entry before I mix the acid and manganese and liberatethe chlorine. I ought not to be losing time, but it steadies me to get things down on paper.But for this record, I’d have lost all my reason long ago. The fly seems to be gettingrestless, and the minute-hand is approaching it. Now for the chlorine.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

[End of the journal]

On Sunday, Jan. 24, 1932, after repeated knocking had failed to gain any responsefrom the eccentric man in Room 303 of the Orange Hotel, a black attendant entered with a passkey and at once fled shrieking downstairs to tell the clerk what he had found. The clerk, afternotifying the police, summoned the manager; and the latter accompanied Constable De Witt, CoronerBogaert, and Dr. Van Keulen to the fatal room.
The occupant lay dead on the floor—his face upward, and bound with a handkerchiefwhich smelled strongly of ammonia. Under this covering the features shewed an expression ofstark, utter fear which transmitted itself to the observers On the back of the neck Dr. VanKeulen found a virulent insect bite—dark red, with a purple ring around it—which suggesteda tsetse-fly or something less innocuous. An examination indicated that death must be due toheart-failure induced by sheer fright rather than to the bite—though a subsequent autopsyindicated that the germ of trypanosomiasis had been introduced into the system.
On the table were several objects—a worn leather blank-book containingthe journal just described, a pen, writing-pad, and open inkwell, a doctor’s medicine casewith the initials “T. S.” marked in gold, bottles of ammonia and hydrochloric acid,and a tumbler about a quarter full of black manganese dioxide. The ammonia bottle demanded asecond look because something besides the fluid seemed to be in it. Looking closer, CoronerBogaert saw that the alien occupant was a fly.
It seemed to be some sort of hybrid with vague tsetse affiliations, but itswings—shewing faintly blue despite the action of the strong ammonia—were a completepuzzle. Something about it waked a faint memory of newspaper reading in Dr. Van Keulen—amemory which the journal was soon to confirm. Its lower parts seemed to have been stained withink, so thoroughly that even the ammonia had not bleached them. Possibly it had fallen at onetime into the inkwell, though the wings were untouched. But how had it managed to fall intothe narrow-necked ammonia bottle? It was as if the creature had deliberately crawled in andcommitted suicide!
But the strangest thing of all was what Constable De Witt noticed on the smoothwhite ceiling overhead as his eyes roved about curiously. At his cry the other three followedhis gaze—even Dr. Van Keulen, who had for some time been thumbing through the worn leatherbook with an expression of mixed horror, fascination, and incredulity. The thing on the ceilingwas a series of shaky, straggling ink-tracks, such as might have been made by the crawling ofsome ink-drenched insect. At once everyone thought of the stains on the fly so oddly found inthe ammonia bottle.
But these were no ordinary ink-tracks. Even a first glance revealed somethinghauntingly familiar about them, and closer inspection brought gasps of startled wonder fromall four observers. Coroner Bogaert instinctively looked around the room to see if there wereany conceivable instrument or arrangement of piled-up furniture which could make it possiblefor those straggling marks to have been drawn by human agency. Finding nothing of the sort,he resumed his curious and almost awestruck upward glance.
For beyond a doubt these inky smudges formed definite letters of the alphabet—letterscoherently arranged in English words. The doctor was the first to make them out clearly, andthe others listened breathlessly as he recited the insane-sounding message so incredibly scrawledin a place no human hand could reach:
“SEE MY JOURNAL—IT GOT ME FIRST—I DIED—THEN I SAWI WAS IN IT—THE BLACKS ARE RIGHT—STRANGE POWERS IN NATURE—NOW I WILL DROWNWHAT IS LEFT—”Presently, amidst the puzzled hush that followed, Dr. Van Keulen commencedreading aloud from the worn leather journal.
