I.

Upon an eroded cliff-top rested the man, gazing far across the valley. Lying thus, he couldsee a great distance, but in all the sere expanse there was no visible motion. Nothing stirredthe dusty plain, the disintegrated sand of long-dry river-beds, where once coursed the gushingstreams of Earth’s youth. There was little greenery in this ultimate world, this finalstage of mankind’s prolonged presence upon the planet. For unnumbered aeons the droughtand sandstorms had ravaged all the lands. The trees and bushes had given way to small, twistedshrubs that persisted long through their sturdiness; but these, in turn, perished before theonslaught of coarse grasses and stringy, tough vegetation of strange evolution.
The ever-present heat, as Earth drew nearer to the sun, withered and killedwith pitiless rays. It had not come at once; long aeons had gone before any could feel the change.And all through those first ages man’s adaptable form had followed the slow mutation andmodelled itself to fit the more and more torrid air. Then the day had come when men could beartheir hot cities but ill, and a gradual recession began, slow yet deliberate. Those towns andsettlements closest to the equator had been first, of course, but later there were others. Man,softened and exhausted, could cope no longer with the ruthlessly mounting heat. It seared himas he was, and evolution was too slow to mould new resistances in him.
Yet not at first were the great cities of the equator left to the spider andthe scorpion. In the early years there were many who stayed on, devising curious shields andarmours against the heat and the deadly dryness. These fearless souls, screening certain buildingsagainst the encroaching sun, made miniature worlds of refuge wherein no protective armour wasneeded. They contrived marvellously ingenious things, so that for a while men persisted in therusting towers, hoping thereby to cling to old lands till the searing should be over. For manywould not believe what the astronomers said, and looked for a coming of the mild olden worldagain. But one day the men of Dath, from the new city of Niyara, made signals to Yuanario, theirimmemorially ancient capital, and gained no answer from the few who remained therein. And whenexplorers reached that millennial city of bridge-linked towers they found only silence. Therewas not even the horror of corruption, for the scavenger lizards had been swift.
Only then did the people fully realize that these cities were lost to them;know that they must forever abandon them to nature. The other colonists in the hot lands fledfrom their brave posts, and total silence reigned within the high basalt walls of a thousandempty towns. Of the dense throngs and multitudinous activities of the past, nothing finallyremained. There now loomed against the rainless deserts only the blistered towers of vacanthouses, factories, and structures of every sort, reflecting the sun’s dazzling radianceand parching in the more and more intolerable heat.
Many lands, however, had still escaped the scorching blight, so that the refugeeswere soon absorbed in the life of a newer world. During strangely prosperous centuries the hoarydeserted cities of the equator grew half-forgotten and entwined with fantastic fables. Few thoughtof those spectral, rotting towers&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. those huddles of shabby walls and cactus-chokedstreets, darkly silent and abandoned.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Wars came, sinful and prolonged, but the times of peace were greater. Yet alwaysthe swollen sun increased its radiance as Earth drew closer to its fiery parent. It was as ifthe planet meant to return to that source whence it was snatched, aeons ago, through the accidentsof cosmic growth.
After a time the blight crept outward from the central belt. Southern Yaratburned as a tenantless desert—and then the north. In Perath and Baling, those ancientcities where brooding centuries dwelt, there moved only the scaly shapes of the serpent andthe salamander, and at last Loton echoed only to the fitful falling of tottering spires andcrumbling domes.
Steady, universal, and inexorable was the great eviction of man from the realmshe had always known. No land within the widening stricken belt was spared; no people left unrouted.It was an epic, a titan tragedy whose plot was unrevealed to the actors—this wholesaledesertion of the cities of men. It took not years or even centuries, but millennia of ruthlesschange. And still it kept on—sullen, inevitable, savagely devastating.
Agriculture was at a standstill, the world fast became too arid for crops.This was remedied by artificial substitutes, soon universally used. And as the old places thathad known the great things of mortals were left, the loot salvaged by the fugitives grew smallerand smaller. Things of the greatest value and importance were left in dead museums—lostamid the centuries—and in the end the heritage of the immemorial past was abandoned. Adegeneracy both physical and cultural set in with the insidious heat. For man had so long dweltin comfort and security that this exodus from past scenes was difficult. Nor were these eventsreceived phlegmatically; their very slowness was terrifying. Degradation and debauchery weresoon common; government was disorganized, and the civilizations aimlessly slid back toward barbarism.
When, forty-nine centuries after the blight from the equatorial belt, the wholewestern hemisphere was left unpeopled, chaos was complete. There was no trace of order or decencyin the last scenes of this titanic, wildly impressive migration. Madness and frenzy stalkedthrough them, and fanatics screamed of an Armageddon close at hand.
Mankind was now a pitiful remnant of the elder races, a fugitive not only fromthe prevailing conditions, but from his own degeneracy. Into the northland and the antarcticwent those who could; the rest lingered for years in an incredible saturnalia, vaguely doubtingthe forthcoming disasters. In the city of Borligo a wholesale execution of the new prophetstook place, after months of unfulfilled expectations. They thought the flight to the northlandunnecessary, and looked no longer for the threatened ending.
How they perished must have been terrible indeed—those vain, foolish creatureswho thought to defy the universe. But the blackened, scorched towns are mute.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
These events, however, must not be chronicled—for there are larger thingsto consider than this complex and unhastening downfall of a lost civilization. During a longperiod morale was at lowest ebb among the courageous few who settled upon the alien arctic andantarctic shores, now mild as were those of southern Yarat in the long-dead past. But here therewas respite. The soil was fertile, and forgotten pastoral arts were called into use anew. Therewas, for a long time, a contented little epitome of the lost lands; though here were no vastthrongs or great buildings. Only a sparse remnant of humanity survived the aeons of change andpeopled those scattered villages of the later world.
How many millennia this continued is not known. The sun was slow in invadingthis last retreat; and as the eras passed there developed a sound, sturdy race, bearing no memoriesor legends of the old, lost lands. Little navigation was practiced by this new people, and theflying machine was wholly forgotten. Their devices were of the simplest type, and their culturewas simple and primitive. Yet they were contented, and accepted the warm climate as somethingnatural and accustomed.
But unknown to these simple peasant-folk, still further rigours of nature wereslowly preparing themselves. As the generations passed, the waters of the vast and unplumbedocean wasted slowly away; enriching the air and the desiccated soil, but sinking lower and lowereach century. The splashing surf still glistened bright, and the swirling eddies were stillthere, but a doom of dryness hung over the whole watery expanse. However, the shrinkage couldnot have been detected save by instruments more delicate than any then known to the race. Evenhad the people realized the ocean’s contraction, it is not likely that any vast alarm orgreat disturbance would have resulted, for the losses were so slight, and the seas so great.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Only a few inches during many centuries—but in many centuries; increasing—

***

So at last the oceans went, and water became a rarity on a globe of sun-bakeddrought. Man had slowly spread over all the arctic and antarctic lands; the equatorial cities,and many of later habitation, were forgotten even to legend.
And now again the peace was disturbed, for water was scarce, and found onlyin deep caverns. There was little enough, even of this; and men died of thirst wandering infar places. Yet so slow were these deadly changes, that each new generation of man was loathto believe what it heard from its parents. None would admit that the heat had been less or thewater more plentiful in the old days, or take warning that days of bitterer burning and droughtwere to come. Thus it was even at the end, when only a few hundred human creatures panted forbreath beneath the cruel sun; a piteous huddled handful out of all the unnumbered millions whohad once dwelt on the doomed planet.
And the hundreds became small, till man was to be reckoned only in tens. Thesetens clung to the shrinking dampness of the caves, and knew at last that the end was near. Soslight was their range that none had ever seen the tiny, fabled spots of ice left close to theplanet’s poles—if such indeed remained. Even had they existed and been known to man,none could have reached them across the trackless and formidable deserts. And so the last patheticfew dwindled.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. 
It cannot be described, this awesome chain of events that depopulated the wholeEarth; the range is too tremendous for any to picture or encompass. Of the people of Earth’sfortunate ages, billions of years before, only a few prophets and madmen could have conceivedthat which was to come—could have grasped visions of the still, dead lands, and long-emptysea-beds. The rest would have doubted&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. doubted alike the shadow of changeupon the planet and the shadow of doom upon the race. For man has always thought himself theimmortal master of natural things.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

II.

When he had eased the dying pangs of the old woman, Ull wandered in a fearfuldaze out into the dazzling sands. She had been a fearsome thing, shrivelled and so dry; likewithered leaves. Her face had been the colour of the sickly yellow grasses that rustled in thehot wind, and she was loathsomely old.
But she had been a companion; someone to stammer out vague fears to, to talkto about this incredible thing; a comrade to share one’s hopes for succour from those silentother colonies beyond the mountains. He could not believe none lived elsewhere, for Ull was young,and not certain as are the old.
For many years he had known none but the old woman—her name was Mladdna.She had come that day in his eleventh year, when all the hunters went to seek food, and didnot return. Ull had no mother that he could remember, and there were few women in the tiny group.When the men vanished, those three women, the young one and the two old, had screamed fearfully,and moaned long. Then the young one had gone mad, and killed herself with a sharp stick. Theold ones buried her in a shallow hole dug with their nails, so Ull had been alone when thisstill older Mladdna came.
She walked with the aid of a knotty pole, a priceless relique of the old forests,hard and shiny with years of use. She did not say whence she came, but stumbled into the cabinwhile the young suicide was being buried. There she waited till the two returned, and they acceptedher incuriously.
That was the way it had been for many weeks, until the two fell sick, and Mladdnacould not cure them. Strange that those younger two should have been stricken, while she, infirmand ancient, lived on. Mladdna had cared for them many days, and at length they died, so thatUll was left with only the stranger. He screamed all the night, so she became at length outof patience, and threatened to die too. Then, hearkening, he became quiet at once; for he wasnot desirous of complete solitude. After that he lived with Mladdna and they gathered rootsto eat.
Mladdna’s rotten teeth were ill suited to the food they gathered, butthey contrived to chop it up till she could manage it. This weary routine of seeking and eatingwas Ull’s childhood.
Now he was strong, and firm, in his nineteenth year, and the old woman wasdead. There was naught to stay for, so he determined at once to seek out those fabled huts beyondthe mountains, and live with the people there. There was nothing to take on the journey. Ullclosed the door of his cabin—why, he could not have told, for no animals had been therefor many years—and left the dead woman within. Half-dazed, and fearful at his own audacity,he walked long hours in the dry grasses, and at length reached the first of the foothills. Theafternoon came, and he climbed until he was weary, and lay down on the grasses. Sprawled there,he thought of many things. He wondered at the strange life, passionately anxious to seek outthe lost colony beyond the mountains; but at last he slept.
When he awoke there was starlight on his face, and he felt refreshed. Now thatthe sun was gone for a time, he travelled more quickly, eating little, and determining to hastenbefore the lack of water became difficult to bear. He had brought none; for the last people,dwelling in one place and never having occasion to bear their precious water away, made no vesselsof any kind. Ull hoped to reach his goal within a day, and thus escape thirst; so he hurriedon beneath the bright stars, running at times in the warm air, and at other times lapsing intoa dogtrot.
So he continued until the sun arose, yet still he was within the small hills,with three great peaks looming ahead. In their shade he rested again. Then he climbed all themorning, and at mid-day surmounted the first peak, where he lay for a time, surveying the spacebefore the next range.
Upon an eroded cliff-top rested the man, gazing far across the valley. Lyingthus he could see a great distance, but in all the sere expanse there was no visible motion.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
The second night came, and found Ull amid the rough peaks, the valley and theplace where he had rested far behind. He was nearly out of the second range now, and hurryingstill. Thirst had come upon him that day, and he regretted his folly. Yet he could not havestayed there with the corpse, alone in the grasslands. He sought to convince himself thus, andhastened ever on, tiredly straining.
And now there were only a few steps before the cliff wall would part and allowa view of the land beyond. Ull stumbled wearily down the stony way, tumbling and bruising himselfeven more. It was nearly before him, this land where men were rumoured to have dwelt; this landof which he had heard tales in his youth. The way was long, but the goal was great. A boulderof giant circumference cut off his view; upon this he scrambled anxiously. Now at last he couldbehold by the sinking orb his long-sought destination, and his thirst and aching muscles wereforgotten as he saw joyfully that a small huddle of buildings clung to the base of the farthercliff.
Ull rested not; but, spurred on by what he saw, ran and staggered and crawledthe half mile remaining. He fancied that he could detect forms among the rude cabins. The sunwas nearly gone; the hateful, devastating sun that had slain humanity. He could not be sureof details, but soon the cabins were near.
They were very old, for clay blocks lasted long in the still dryness of thedying world. Little, indeed, changed but the living things—the grasses and these last men.
Before him an open door swung upon rude pegs. In the fading light Ull entered,weary unto death, seeking painfully the expected faces.
Then he fell upon the floor and wept, for at the table was propped a dry andancient skeleton.

***

He rose at last, crazed by thirst, aching unbearably, and suffering the greatestdisappointment any mortal could know. He was, then, the last living thing upon the globe. Histhe heritage of the Earth&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all the lands, and all to him equally useless.He staggered up, not looking at the dim white form in the reflected moonlight, and went throughthe door. About the empty village he wandered, searching for water and sadly inspecting thislong-empty place so spectrally preserved by the changeless air. Here there was a dwelling, therea rude place where things had been made—clay vessels holding only dust, and nowhere anyliquid to quench his burning thirst.
Then, in the centre of the little town, Ull saw a well-curb. He knew what itwas, for he had heard tales of such things from Mladdna. With pitiful joy, he reeled forwardand leaned upon the edge. There, at last, was the end of his search. Water—slimy, stagnant,and shallow, but water—before his sight.
Ull cried out in the voice of a tortured animal, groping for the chain andbucket. His hand slipped on the slimy edge; and he fell upon his chest across the brink. Fora moment he lay there—then soundlessly his body was precipitated down the black shaft.
There was a slight splash in the murky shallowness as he struck some long-sunkenstone, dislodged aeons ago from the massive coping. The disturbed water subsided into quietness.
And now at last the Earth was dead. The final, pitiful survivor had perished.All the teeming billions; the slow aeons; the empires and civilizations of mankind were summedup in this poor twisted form—and how titanically meaningless it all had been! Now indeedhad come an end and climax to all the efforts of humanity—how monstrous and incrediblea climax in the eyes of those poor complacent fools of the prosperous days! Not ever again wouldthe planet know the thunderous tramping of human millions—or even the crawling of lizardsand the buzz of insects, for they, too, had gone. Now was come the reign of sapless branchesand endless fields of tough grasses. Earth, like its cold, imperturbable moon, was given overto silence and blackness forever.
The stars whirred on; the whole careless plan would continue for infinitiesunknown. This trivial end of a negligible episode mattered not to distant nebulae or to sunsnew-born, flourishing, and dying. The race of man, too puny and momentary to have a real functionor purpose, was as if it had never existed. To such a conclusion the aeons of its farcicallytoilsome evolution had led.
But when the deadly sun’s first rays darted across the valley, a lightfound its way to the weary face of a broken figure that lay in the slime.
