I.

I am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow my advice without knowingwhy. It is altogether against my will that I tell my reasons for opposing this contemplatedinvasion of the antarctic—with its vast fossil-hunt and its wholesale boring and meltingof the ancient ice-cap—and I am the more reluctant because my warning may be in vain.Doubt of the real facts, as I must reveal them, is inevitable; yet if I suppressed what willseem extravagant and incredible there would be nothing left. The hitherto withheld photographs,both ordinary and aërial, will count in my favour; for they are damnably vivid and graphic.Still, they will be doubted because of the great lengths to which clever fakery can be carried.The ink drawings, of course, will be jeered at as obvious impostures; notwithstanding a strangenessof technique which art experts ought to remark and puzzle over.

In the end I must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientific leaderswho have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thought to weigh my data on its own hideouslyconvincing merits or in the light of certain primordial and highly baffling myth-cycles; andon the other hand, sufficient influence to deter the exploring world in general from any rashand overambitious programme in the region of those mountains of madness. It is an unfortunatefact that relatively obscure men like myself and my associates, connected only with a smalluniversity, have little chance of making an impression where matters of a wildly bizarre orhighly controversial nature are concerned.

It is further against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialistsin the fields which came primarily to be concerned. As a geologist my object in leading theMiskatonic University Expedition was wholly that of securing deep-level specimens of rock andsoil from various parts of the antarctic continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised byProf. Frank H. Pabodie of our engineering department. I had no wish to be a pioneer in any otherfield than this; but I did hope that the use of this new mechanical appliance at different pointsalong previously explored paths would bring to light materials of a sort hitherto unreachedby the ordinary methods of collection. Pabodie’s drilling apparatus, as the public alreadyknows from our reports, was unique and radical in its lightness, portability, and capacity tocombine the ordinary artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular rockdrill in such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying hardness. Steel head, jointedrods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden derrick, dynamiting paraphernalia, cording, rubbish-removalauger, and sectional piping for bores five inches wide and up to 1000 feet deep all formed,with needed accessories, no greater load than three seven-dog sledges could carry; this beingmade possible by the clever aluminum alloy of which most of the metal objects were fashioned.Four large Dornier aëroplanes, designed especially for the tremendous altitude flying necessaryon the antarctic plateau and with added fuel-warming and quick-starting devices worked out byPabodie, could transport our entire expedition from a base at the edge of the great ice barrierto various suitable inland points, and from these points a sufficient quota of dogs would serveus.

We planned to cover as great an area as one antarctic season—or longer,if absolutely necessary—would permit, operating mostly in the mountain-ranges and on theplateau south of Ross Sea; regions explored in varying degree by Shackleton, Amundsen, Scott,and Byrd. With frequent changes of camp, made by aëroplane and involving distances greatenough to be of geological significance, we expected to unearth a quite unprecedented amountof material; especially in the pre-Cambrian strata of which so narrow a range of antarctic specimenshad previously been secured. We wished also to obtain as great as possible a variety of theupper fossiliferous rocks, since the primal life-history of this bleak realm of ice and deathis of the highest importance to our knowledge of the earth’s past. That the antarcticcontinent was once temperate and even tropical, with a teeming vegetable and animal life ofwhich the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and penguins of the northern edge are the only survivals,is a matter of common information; and we hoped to expand that information in variety, accuracy,and detail. When a simple boring revealed fossiliferous signs, we would enlarge the apertureby blasting in order to get specimens of suitable size and condition.

Our borings, of varying depth according to the promise held out by the uppersoil or rock, were to be confined to exposed or nearly exposed land surfaces—these inevitablybeing slopes and ridges because of the mile or two-mile thickness of solid ice overlying thelower levels. We could not afford to waste drilling depth on any considerable amount of mereglaciation, though Pabodie had worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in thick clustersof borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a gasoline-driven dynamo.It is this plan—which we could not put into effect except experimentally on an expeditionsuch as ours—that the coming Starkweather-Moore Expedition proposes to follow despitethe warnings I have issued since our return from the antarctic.

The public knows of the Miskatonic Expedition through our frequent wirelessreports to the Arkham Advertiser and Associated Press, and through the later articlesof Pabodie and myself. We consisted of four men from the University—Pabodie, Lake of thebiology department, Atwood of the physics department (also a meteorologist), and I representinggeology and having nominal command—besides sixteen assistants; seven graduate studentsfrom Miskatonic and nine skilled mechanics. Of these sixteen, twelve were qualified aëroplanepilots, all but two of whom were competent wireless operators. Eight of them understood navigationwith compass and sextant, as did Pabodie, Atwood, and I. In addition, of course, our two ships—woodenex-whalers, reinforced for ice conditions and having auxiliary steam—were fully manned.The Nathaniel Derby Pickman Foundation, aided by a few special contributions, financed the expedition;hence our preparations were extremely thorough despite the absence of great publicity. The dogs,sledges, machines, camp materials, and unassembled parts of our five planes were delivered inBoston, and there our ships were loaded. We were marvellously well-equipped for our specificpurposes, and in all matters pertaining to supplies, regimen, transportation, and camp constructionwe profited by the excellent example of our many recent and exceptionally brilliant predecessors.It was the unusual number and fame of these predecessors which made our own expedition—amplethough it was—so little noticed by the world at large.

As the newspapers told, we sailed from Boston Harbour on September 2, 1930;taking a leisurely course down the coast and through the Panama Canal, and stopping at Samoaand Hobart, Tasmania, at which latter place we took on final supplies. None of our exploringparty had ever been in the polar regions before, hence we all relied greatly on our ship captains—J.B. Douglas, commanding the brig Arkham, and serving as commander of the sea party, andGeorg Thorfinnssen, commanding the barque Miskatonic—both veteran whalers in antarcticwaters. As we left the inhabited world behind the sun sank lower and lower in the north, andstayed longer and longer above the horizon each day. At about 62° South Latitude we sightedour first icebergs—table-like objects with vertical sides—and just before reachingthe Antarctic Circle, which we crossed on October 20 with appropriately quaint ceremonies, wewere considerably troubled with field ice. The falling temperature bothered me considerablyafter our long voyage through the tropics, but I tried to brace up for the worse rigours tocome. On many occasions the curious atmospheric effects enchanted me vastly; these includinga strikingly vivid mirage—the first I had ever seen—in which distant bergs becamethe battlements of unimaginable cosmic castles.

Pushing through the ice, which was fortunately neither extensive nor thicklypacked, we regained open water at South Latitude 67°, East Longitude 175°. On the morningof October 26 a strong “land blink” appeared on the south, and before noon we allfelt a thrill of excitement at beholding a vast, lofty, and snow-clad mountain chain which openedout and covered the whole vista ahead. At last we had encountered an outpost of the great unknowncontinent and its cryptic world of frozen death. These peaks were obviously the Admiralty Rangediscovered by Ross, and it would now be our task to round Cape Adare and sail down the eastcoast of Victoria Land to our contemplated base on the shore of McMurdo Sound at the foot ofthe volcano Erebus in South Latitude 77° 9′.

The last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancy-stirring, great barren peaksof mystery looming up constantly against the west as the low northern sun of noon or the stilllower horizon-grazing southern sun of midnight poured its hazy reddish rays over the white snow,bluish ice and water lanes, and black bits of exposed granite slope. Through the desolate summitsswept raging intermittent gusts of the terrible antarctic wind; whose cadences sometimes heldvague suggestions of a wild and half-sentient musical piping, with notes extending over a widerange, and which for some subconscious mnemonic reason seemed to me disquieting and even dimlyterrible. Something about the scene reminded me of the strange and disturbing Asian paintingsof Nicholas Roerich, and of the still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of the evillyfabled plateau of Leng which occur in the dreaded Necronomicon of the mad Arab AbdulAlhazred. I was rather sorry, later on, that I had ever looked into that monstrous book at thecollege library.

On the seventh of November, sight of the westward range having been temporarilylost, we passed Franklin Island; and the next day descried the cones of Mts. Erebus and Terroron Ross Island ahead, with the long line of the Parry Mountains beyond. There now stretchedoff to the east the low, white line of the great ice barrier; rising perpendicularly to a heightof 200 feet like the rocky cliffs of Quebec, and marking the end of southward navigation. Inthe afternoon we entered McMurdo Sound and stood off the coast in the lee of smoking Mt. Erebus.The scoriac peak towered up some 12,700 feet against the eastern sky, like a Japanese printof the sacred Fujiyama; while beyond it rose the white, ghost-like height of Mt. Terror, 10,900feet in altitude, and now extinct as a volcano. Puffs of smoke from Erebus came intermittently,and one of the graduate assistants—a brilliant young fellow named Danforth—pointedout what looked like lava on the snowy slope; remarking that this mountain, discovered in 1840,had undoubtedly been the source of Poe’s image when he wrote seven years later of

                              “—the lavas that restlessly roll

            Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek

            In the ultimate climes of the pole—

            That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek

            In the realms of the boreal pole.”         

Danforth was a great reader of bizarre material, and had talked a good deal of Poe. I was interestedmyself because of the antarctic scene of Poe’s only long story—the disturbing andenigmatical Arthur Gordon Pym. On the barren shore, and on the lofty ice barrier in thebackground, myriads of grotesque penguins squawked and flapped their fins; while many fat sealswere visible on the water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting ice.

Using small boats, we effected a difficult landing on Ross Island shortly aftermidnight on the morning of the 9th, carrying a line of cable from each of the ships and preparingto unload supplies by means of a breeches-buoy arrangement. Our sensations on first treadingantarctic soil were poignant and complex, even though at this particular point the Scott andShackleton expeditions had preceded us. Our camp on the frozen shore below the volcano’sslope was only a provisional one; headquarters being kept aboard the Arkham. We landedall our drilling apparatus, dogs, sledges, tents, provisions, gasoline tanks, experimental ice-meltingoutfit, cameras both ordinary and aërial, aëroplane parts, and other accessories,including three small portable wireless outfits (besides those in the planes) capable of communicatingwith the Arkham’s large outfit from any part of the antarctic continent that wewould be likely to visit. The ship’s outfit, communicating with the outside world, wasto convey press reports to the Arkham Advertiser’s powerful wireless station onKingsport Head, Mass. We hoped to complete our work during a single antarctic summer; but ifthis proved impossible we would winter on the Arkham, sending the Miskatonic northbefore the freezing of the ice for another summer’s supplies.

I need not repeat what the newspapers have already published about our earlywork: of our ascent of Mt. Erebus; our successful mineral borings at several points on RossIsland and the singular speed with which Pabodie’s apparatus accomplished them, even throughsolid rock layers; our provisional test of the small ice-melting equipment; our perilous ascentof the great barrier with sledges and supplies; and our final assembling of five huge aëroplanesat the camp atop the barrier. The health of our land party—twenty men and 55 Alaskan sledgedogs—was remarkable, though of course we had so far encountered no really destructivetemperatures or windstorms. For the most part, the thermometer varied between zero and 20°or 25° above, and our experience with New England winters had accustomed us to rigours ofthis sort. The barrier camp was semi-permanent, and destined to be a storage cache for gasoline,provisions, dynamite, and other supplies. Only four of our planes were needed to carry the actualexploring material, the fifth being left with a pilot and two men from the ships at the storagecache to form a means of reaching us from the Arkham in case all our exploring planeswere lost. Later, when not using all the other planes for moving apparatus, we would employone or two in a shuttle transportation service between this cache and another permanent baseon the great plateau from 600 to 700 miles southward, beyond Beardmore Glacier. Despite thealmost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pour down from the plateau, wedetermined to dispense with intermediate bases; taking our chances in the interest of economyand probable efficiency.

Wireless reports have spoken of the breath-taking four-hour non-stop flightof our squadron on November 21 over the lofty shelf ice, with vast peaks rising on the west,and the unfathomed silences echoing to the sound of our engines. Wind troubled us only moderately,and our radio compasses helped us through the one opaque fog we encountered. When the vast riseloomed ahead, between Latitudes 83° and 84°, we knew we had reached Beardmore Glacier,the largest valley glacier in the world, and that the frozen sea was now giving place to a frowningand mountainous coastline. At last we were truly entering the white, aeon-dead world of theultimate south, and even as we realised it we saw the peak of Mt. Nansen in the eastern distance,towering up to its height of almost 15,000 feet.

The successful establishment of the southern base above the glacier in Latitude86° 7′, East Longitude 174° 23′, and the phenomenally rapid and effective borings andblastings made at various points reached by our sledge trips and short aëroplane flights,are matters of history; as is the arduous and triumphant ascent of Mt. Nansen by Pabodie andtwo of the graduate students—Gedney and Carroll—on December 13–15. We weresome 8500 feet above sea-level, and when experimental drillings revealed solid ground only twelvefeet down through the snow and ice at certain points, we made considerable use of the smallmelting apparatus and sunk bores and performed dynamiting at many places where no previous explorerhad ever thought of securing mineral specimens. The pre-Cambrian granites and beacon sandstonesthus obtained confirmed our belief that this plateau was homogeneous with the great bulk ofthe continent to the west, but somewhat different from the parts lying eastward below SouthAmerica—which we then thought to form a separate and smaller continent divided from thelarger one by a frozen junction of Ross and Weddell Seas, though Byrd has since disproved thehypothesis.

In certain of the sandstones, dynamited and chiselled after boring revealedtheir nature, we found some highly interesting fossil markings and fragments—notably ferns,seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such molluscs as lingulae and gasteropods—all of whichseemed of real significance in connexion with the region’s primordial history. There wasalso a queer triangular, striated marking about a foot in greatest diameter which Lake piecedtogether from three fragments of slate brought up from a deep-blasted aperture. These fragmentscame from a point to the westward, near the Queen Alexandra Range; and Lake, as a biologist,seemed to find their curious marking unusually puzzling and provocative, though to my geologicaleye it looked not unlike some of the ripple effects reasonably common in the sedimentary rocks.Since slate is no more than a metamorphic formation into which a sedimentary stratum is pressed,and since the pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on any markings which may exist,I saw no reason for extreme wonder over the striated depression.

On January 6, 1931, Lake, Pabodie, Danforth, all six of the students, four mechanics,and I flew directly over the south pole in two of the great planes, being forced down once bya sudden high wind which fortunately did not develop into a typical storm. This was, as thepapers have stated, one of several observation flights; during others of which we tried to discernnew topographical features in areas unreached by previous explorers. Our early flights weredisappointing in this latter respect; though they afforded us some magnificent examples of therichly fantastic and deceptive mirages of the polar regions, of which our sea voyage had givenus some brief foretastes. Distant mountains floated in the sky as enchanted cities, and oftenthe whole white world would dissolve into a gold, silver, and scarlet land of Dunsanian dreamsand adventurous expectancy under the magic of the low midnight sun. On cloudy days we had considerabletrouble in flying, owing to the tendency of snowy earth and sky to merge into one mystical opalescentvoid with no visible horizon to mark the junction of the two.

At length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying 500 miles eastwardwith all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh sub-base at a point which would probablybe on the smaller continental division, as we mistakenly conceived it. Geological specimensobtained there would be desirable for purposes of comparison. Our health so far had remainedexcellent; lime-juice well offsetting the steady diet of tinned and salted food, and temperaturesgenerally above zero enabling us to do without our thickest furs. It was now midsummer, andwith haste and care we might be able to conclude work by March and avoid a tedious winteringthrough the long antarctic night. Several savage windstorms had burst upon us from the west,but we had escaped damage through the skill of Atwood in devising rudimentary aëroplaneshelters and windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and reinforcing the principal camp buildings withsnow. Our good luck and efficiency had indeed been almost uncanny.

The outside world knew, of course, of our programme, and was told also of Lake’sstrange and dogged insistence on a westward—or rather, northwestward—prospectingtrip before our radical shift to the new base. It seems he had pondered a great deal, and withalarmingly radical daring, over that triangular striated marking in the slate; reading intoit certain contradictions in Nature and geological period which whetted his curiosity to theutmost, and made him avid to sink more borings and blastings in the west-stretching formationto which the exhumed fragments evidently belonged. He was strangely convinced that the markingwas the print of some bulky, unknown, and radically unclassifiable organism of considerablyadvanced evolution, notwithstanding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly ancient a date—Cambrianif not actually pre-Cambrian—as to preclude the probable existence not only of all highlyevolved life, but of any life at all above the unicellular or at most the trilobite stage. Thesefragments, with their odd marking, must have been 500 million to a thousand million years old.

II.

Popular imagination, I judge, responded actively to our wireless bulletins of Lake’s startnorthwestward into regions never trodden by human foot or penetrated by human imagination; thoughwe did not mention his wild hopes of revolutionising the entire sciences of biology and geology.His preliminary sledging and boring journey of January 11–18 with Pabodie and five others—marredby the loss of two dogs in an upset when crossing one of the great pressure-ridges in the ice—hadbrought up more and more of the Archaean slate; and even I was interested by the singular profusionof evident fossil markings in that unbelievably ancient stratum. These markings, however, wereof very primitive life-forms involving no great paradox except that any life-forms should occurin rock as definitely pre-Cambrian as this seemed to be; hence I still failed to see the goodsense of Lake’s demand for an interlude in our time-saving programme—an interluderequiring the use of all four planes, many men, and the whole of the expedition’s mechanicalapparatus. I did not, in the end, veto the plan; though I decided not to accompany the northwestwardparty despite Lake’s plea for my geological advice. While they were gone, I would remainat the base with Pabodie and five men and work out final plans for the eastward shift. In preparationfor this transfer one of the planes had begun to move up a good gasoline supply from McMurdoSound; but this could wait temporarily. I kept with me one sledge and nine dogs, since it isunwise to be at any time without possible transportation in an utterly tenantless world of aeon-longdeath.

Lake’s sub-expedition into the unknown, as everyone will recall, sentout its own reports from the short-wave transmitters on the planes; these being simultaneouslypicked up by our apparatus at the southern base and by the Arkham at McMurdo Sound, whencethey were relayed to the outside world on wave-lengths up to fifty metres. The start was madeJanuary 22 at 4 A.M.; and the first wireless message we received came only two hours later,when Lake spoke of descending and starting a small-scale ice-melting and bore at a point some300 miles away from us. Six hours after that a second and very excited message told of the frantic,beaver-like work whereby a shallow shaft had been sunk and blasted; culminating in the discoveryof slate fragments with several markings approximately like the one which had caused the originalpuzzlement.

Three hours later a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight inthe teeth of a raw and piercing gale; and when I despatched a message of protest against furtherhazards, Lake replied curtly that his new specimens made any hazard worth taking. I saw thathis excitement had reached the point of mutiny, and that I could do nothing to check this headlongrisk of the whole expedition’s success; but it was appalling to think of his plungingdeeper and deeper into that treacherous and sinister white immensity of tempests and unfathomedmysteries which stretched off for some 1500 miles to the half-known, half-suspected coast-lineof Queen Mary and Knox Lands.

Then, in about an hour and a half more, came that doubly excited message fromLake’s moving plane which almost reversed my sentiments and made me wish I had accompaniedthe party.

“10:05 P.M. On the wing. After snowstorm, have spied mountain-range aheadhigher than any hitherto seen. May equal Himalayas allowing for height of plateau. ProbableLatitude 76° 15′, Longitude 113° 10′ E. Reaches far as can see to right and left. Suspicionof two smoking cones. All peaks black and bare of snow. Gale blowing off them impedes navigation.”After that Pabodie, the men, and I hung breathlessly over the receiver. Thoughtof this titanic mountain rampart 700 miles away inflamed our deepest sense of adventure; andwe rejoiced that our expedition, if not ourselves personally, had been its discoverers. In halfan hour Lake called us again.

“Moulton’s plane forced down on plateau in foothills, but nobodyhurt and perhaps can repair. Shall transfer essentials to other three for return or furthermoves if necessary, but no more heavy plane travel needed just now. Mountains surpass anythingin imagination. Am going up scouting in Carroll’s plane, with all weight out. You can’timagine anything like this. Highest peaks must go over 35,000 feet. Everest out of the running.Atwood to work out height with theodolite while Carroll and I go up. Probably wrong about cones,for formations look stratified. Possibly pre-Cambrian slate with other strata mixed in. Queerskyline effects—regular sections of cubes clinging to highest peaks. Whole thing marvellousin red-gold light of low sun. Like land of mystery in a dream or gateway to forbidden worldof untrodden wonder. Wish you were here to study.”Though it was technically sleeping-time, not one of us listeners thought fora moment of retiring. It must have been a good deal the same at McMurdo Sound, where the supplycache and the Arkham were also getting the messages; for Capt. Douglas gave out a callcongratulating everybody on the important find, and Sherman, the cache operator, seconded hissentiments. We were sorry, of course, about the damaged aëroplane; but hoped it could beeasily mended. Then, at 11 P.M., came another call from Lake.

“Up with Carroll over highest foothills. Don’t dare try reallytall peaks in present weather, but shall later. Frightful work climbing, and hard going at thisaltitude, but worth it. Great range fairly solid, hence can’t get any glimpses beyond.Main summits exceed Himalayas, and very queer. Range looks like pre-Cambrian slate, with plainsigns of many other upheaved strata. Was wrong about volcanism. Goes farther in either directionthan we can see. Swept clear of snow above about 21,000 feet. Odd formations on slopes of highestmountains. Great low square blocks with exactly vertical sides, and rectangular lines of lowvertical ramparts, like the old Asian castles clinging to steep mountains in Roerich’spaintings. Impressive from distance. Flew close to some, and Carroll thought they were formedof smaller separate pieces, but that is probably weathering. Most edges crumbled and roundedoff as if exposed to storms and climate changes for millions of years. Parts, especially upperparts, seem to be of lighter-coloured rock than any visible strata on slopes proper, hence anevidently crystalline origin. Close flying shews many cave-mouths, some unusually regular inoutline, square or semicircular. You must come and investigate. Think I saw rampart squarelyon top of one peak. Height seems about 30,000 to 35,000 feet. Am up 21,500 myself, in devilishgnawing cold. Wind whistles and pipes through passes and in and out of caves, but no flyingdanger so far.”From then on for another half-hour Lake kept up a running fire of comment,and expressed his intention of climbing some of the peaks on foot. I replied that I would joinhim as soon as he could send a plane, and that Pabodie and I would work out the best gasolineplan—just where and how to concentrate our supply in view of the expedition’s alteredcharacter. Obviously, Lake’s boring operations, as well as his aëroplane activities,would need a great deal delivered for the new base which he was to establish at the foot ofthe mountains; and it was possible that the eastward flight might not be made after all thisseason. In connexion with this business I called Capt. Douglas and asked him to get as muchas possible out of the ships and up the barrier with the single dog-team we had left there.A direct route across the unknown region between Lake and McMurdo Sound was what we really oughtto establish.

Lake called me later to say that he had decided to let the camp stay whereMoulton’s plane had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed somewhat.The ice-sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there visible, and he would sink someborings and blasts at that very point before making any sledge trips or climbing expeditions.He spoke of the ineffable majesty of the whole scene, and the queer state of his sensationsat being in the lee of vast silent pinnacles whose ranks shot up like a wall reaching the skyat the world’s rim. Atwood’s theodolite observations had placed the height of thefive tallest peaks at from 30,000 to 34,000 feet. The windswept nature of the terrain clearlydisturbed Lake, for it argued the occasional existence of prodigious gales violent beyond anythingwe had so far encountered. His camp lay a little more than five miles from where the higherfoothills abruptly rose. I could almost trace a note of subconscious alarm in his words—flashedacross a glacial void of 700 miles—as he urged that we all hasten with the matter andget the strange new region disposed of as soon as possible. He was about to rest now, aftera continuous day’s work of almost unparalleled speed, strenuousness, and results.

In the morning I had a three-cornered wireless talk with Lake and Capt. Douglasat their widely separated bases; and it was agreed that one of Lake’s planes would cometo my base for Pabodie, the five men, and myself, as well as for all the fuel it could carry.The rest of the fuel question, depending on our decision about an easterly trip, could waitfor a few days; since Lake had enough for immediate camp heat and borings. Eventually the oldsouthern base ought to be restocked; but if we postponed the easterly trip we would not useit till the next summer, and meanwhile Lake must send a plane to explore a direct route betweenhis new mountains and McMurdo Sound.

Pabodie and I prepared to close our base for a short or long period, as thecase might be. If we wintered in the antarctic we would probably fly straight from Lake’sbase to the Arkham without returning to this spot. Some of our conical tents had alreadybeen reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and now we decided to complete the job of making a permanentEsquimau village. Owing to a very liberal tent supply, Lake had with him all that his base wouldneed even after our arrival. I wirelessed that Pabodie and I would be ready for the northwestwardmove after one day’s work and one night’s rest.

Our labours, however, were not very steady after 4 P.M.; for about that timeLake began sending in the most extraordinary and excited messages. His working day had startedunpropitiously; since an aëroplane survey of the nearly exposed rock surfaces shewed anentire absence of those Archaean and primordial strata for which he was looking, and which formedso great a part of the colossal peaks that loomed up at a tantalising distance from the camp.Most of the rocks glimpsed were apparently Jurassic and Comanchian sandstones and Permian andTriassic schists, with now and then a glossy black outcropping suggesting a hard and slaty coal.This rather discouraged Lake, whose plans all hinged on unearthing specimens more than 500 millionyears older. It was clear to him that in order to recover the Archaean slate vein in which hehad found the odd markings, he would have to make a long sledge trip from these foothills tothe steep slopes of the gigantic mountains themselves.

He had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring as part of the expedition’sgeneral programme; hence set up the drill and put five men to work with it while the rest finishedsettling the camp and repairing the damaged aëroplane. The softest visible rock—asandstone about a quarter of a mile from the camp—had been chosen for the first sampling;and the drill made excellent progress without much supplementary blasting. It was about threehours afterward, following the first really heavy blast of the operation, that the shoutingof the drill crew was heard; and that young Gedney—the acting foreman—rushed intothe camp with the startling news.

They had struck a cave. Early in the boring the sandstone had given place toa vein of Comanchian limestone full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals, echini, and spirifera,and with occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges and marine vertebrate bones—the latterprobably of teliosts, sharks, and ganoids. This in itself was important enough, as affordingthe first vertebrate fossils the expedition had yet secured; but when shortly afterward thedrill-head dropped through the stratum into apparent vacancy, a wholly new and doubly intensewave of excitement spread among the excavators. A good-sized blast had laid open the subterrenesecret; and now, through a jagged aperture perhaps five feet across and three feet thick, thereyawned before the avid searchers a section of shallow limestone hollowing worn more than fiftymillion years ago by the trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic world.

The hollowed layer was not more than seven or eight feet deep, but extendedoff indefinitely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which suggested itsmembership in an extensive subterranean system. Its roof and floor were abundantly equippedwith large stalactites and stalagmites, some of which met in columnar form; but important aboveall else was the vast deposit of shells and bones which in places nearly choked the passage.Washed down from unknown jungles of Mesozoic tree-ferns and fungi, and forests of Tertiary cycads,fan-palms, and primitive angiosperms, this osseous medley contained representatives of moreCretaceous, Eocene, and other animal species than the greatest palaeontologist could have countedor classified in a year. Molluscs, crustacean armour, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, andearly mammals—great and small, known and unknown. No wonder Gedney ran back to the campshouting, and no wonder everyone else dropped work and rushed headlong through the biting coldto where the tall derrick marked a new-found gateway to secrets of inner earth and vanishedaeons.

When Lake had satisfied the first keen edge of his curiosity he scribbled amessage in his notebook and had young Moulton run back to the camp to despatch it by wireless.This was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the identification of early shells,bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnants of labyrinthodonts and thecodonts, great mososaurskull fragments, dinosaur vertebrae and armour-plates, pterodactyl teeth and wing-bones, archaeopteryxdebris, Miocene sharks’ teeth, primitive bird-skulls, and skulls, vertebrae, and otherbones of archaic mammals such as palaeotheres, xiphodons, dinocerases, eohippi, oreodons, andtitanotheres. There was nothing as recent as a mastodon, elephant, true camel, deer, or bovineanimal; hence Lake concluded that the last deposits had occurred during the Oligocene age, andthat the hollowed stratum had lain in its present dried, dead, and inaccessible state for atleast thirty million years.

On the other hand, the prevalence of very early life-forms was singular inthe highest degree. Though the limestone formation was, on the evidence of such typical imbeddedfossils as ventriculites, positively and unmistakably Comanchian and not a particle earlier;the free fragments in the hollow space included a surprising proportion from organisms hithertoconsidered as peculiar to far older periods—even rudimentary fishes, molluscs, and coralsas remote as the Silurian or Ordovician. The inevitable inference was that in this part of theworld there had been a remarkable and unique degree of continuity between the life of over 300million years ago and that of only thirty million years ago. How far this continuity had extendedbeyond the Oligocene age when the cavern was closed, was of course past all speculation. Inany event, the coming of the frightful ice in the Pleistocene some 500,000 years ago—amere yesterday as compared with the age of this cavity—must have put an end to any ofthe primal forms which had locally managed to outlive their common terms.

Lake was not content to let his first message stand, but had another bulletinwritten and despatched across the snow to the camp before Moulton could get back. After thatMoulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes; transmitting to me—and to the Arkham for relaying to the outside world—the frequent postscripts which Lake senthim by a succession of messengers. Those who followed the newspapers will remember the excitementcreated among men of science by that afternoon’s reports—reports which have finallyled, after all these years, to the organisation of that very Starkweather-Moore Expedition whichI am so anxious to dissuade from its purposes. I had better give the messages literally as Lakesent them, and as our base operator McTighe translated them from his pencil shorthand.

“Fowler makes discovery of highest importance in sandstone and limestonefragments from blasts. Several distinct triangular striated prints like those in Archaean slate,proving that source survived from over 600 million years ago to Comanchian times without morethan moderate morphological changes and decrease in average size. Comanchian prints apparentlymore primitive or decadent, if anything, than older ones. Emphasise importance of discoveryin press. Will mean to biology what Einstein has meant to mathematics and physics. Joins upwith my previous work and amplifies conclusions. Appears to indicate, as I suspected, that earthhas seen whole cycle or cycles of organic life before known one that begins with Archaeozoiccells. Was evolved and specialised not later than thousand million years ago, when planet wasyoung and recently uninhabitable for any life-forms or normal protoplasmic structure. Questionarises when, where, and how development took place.”

————————“Later. Examining certain skeletal fragments of large land and marinesaurians and primitive mammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony structure notattributable to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any period. Of two sorts—straight,penetrant bores, and apparently hacking incisions. One or two cases of cleanly severed bone.Not many specimens affected. Am sending to camp for electric torches. Will extend search areaunderground by hacking away stalactites.”

————————“Still later. Have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six inchesacross and an inch and a half thick, wholly unlike any visible local formation. Greenish, butno evidences to place its period. Has curious smoothness and regularity. Shaped like five-pointedstar with tips broken off, and signs of other cleavage at inward angles and in centre of surface.Small, smooth depression in centre of unbroken surface. Arouses much curiosity as to sourceand weathering. Probably some freak of water action. Carroll, with magnifier, thinks he canmake out additional markings of geologic significance. Groups of tiny dots in regular patterns.Dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to hate this soapstone. Must see if it has any peculiarodour. Will report again when Mills gets back with light and we start on underground area.”

————————“10:15 P.M. Important discovery. Orrendorf and Watkins, working undergroundat 9:45 with light, found monstrous barrel-shaped fossil of wholly unknown nature; probablyvegetable unless overgrown specimen of unknown marine radiata. Tissue evidently preserved bymineral salts. Tough as leather, but astonishing flexibility retained in places. Marks of broken-offparts at ends and around sides. Six feet end to end, 3.5 feet central diameter, tapering to1 foot at each end. Like a barrel with five bulging ridges in place of staves. Lateral breakages,as of thinnish stalks, are at equator in middle of these ridges. In furrows between ridges arecurious growths. Combs or wings that fold up and spread out like fans. All greatly damaged butone, which gives almost seven-foot wing spread. Arrangement reminds one of certain monstersof primal myth, especially fabled Elder Things in Necronomicon. These wings seem to bemembraneous, stretched on framework of glandular tubing. Apparent minute orifices in frame tubingat wing tips. Ends of body shrivelled, giving no clue to interior or to what has been brokenoff there. Must dissect when we get back to camp. Can’t decide whether vegetable or animal.Many features obviously of almost incredible primitiveness. Have set all hands cutting stalactitesand looking for further specimens. Additional scarred bones found, but these must wait. Havingtrouble with dogs. They can’t endure the new specimen, and would probably tear it to piecesif we didn’t keep it at a distance from them.”

————————“11:30 P.M. Attention, Dyer, Pabodie, Douglas. Matter of highest—Imight say transcendent—importance. Arkham must relay to Kingsport Head Stationat once. Strange barrel growth is the Archaean thing that left prints in rocks. Mills, Boudreau,and Fowler discover cluster of thirteen more at underground point forty feet from aperture.Mixed with curiously rounded and configured soapstone fragments smaller than one previouslyfound—star-shaped but no marks of breakage except at some of the points. Of organic specimens,eight apparently perfect, with all appendages. Have brought all to surface, leading off dogsto distance. They cannot stand the things. Give close attention to description and repeat backfor accuracy. Papers must get this right.

“Objects are eight feet long all over. Six-foot five-ridged barrel torso3.5 feet central diameter, 1 foot end diameters. Dark grey, flexible, and infinitely tough.Seven-foot membraneous wings of same colour, found folded, spread out of furrows between ridges.Wing framework tubular or glandular, of lighter grey, with orifices at wing tips. Spread wingshave serrated edge. Around equator, one at central apex of each of the five vertical, stave-likeridges, are five systems of light grey flexible arms or tentacles found tightly folded to torsobut expansible to maximum length of over 3 feet. Like arms of primitive crinoid. Single stalks3 inches diameter branch after 6 inches into five sub-stalks, each of which branches after 8inches into five small, tapering tentacles or tendrils, giving each stalk a total of 25 tentacles.

“At top of torso blunt bulbous neck of lighter grey with gill-like suggestionsholds yellowish five-pointed starfish-shaped apparent head covered with three-inch wiry ciliaof various prismatic colours. Head thick and puffy, about 2 feet point to point, with three-inchflexible yellowish tubes projecting from each point. Slit in exact centre of top probably breathingaperture. At end of each tube is spherical expansion where yellowish membrane rolls back onhandling to reveal glassy, red-irised globe, evidently an eye. Five slightly longer reddishtubes start from inner angles of starfish-shaped head and end in sac-like swellings of samecolour which upon pressure open to bell-shaped orifices 2 inches maximum diameter and linedwith sharp white tooth-like projections. Probable mouths. All these tubes, cilia, and pointsof starfish-head found folded tightly down; tubes and points clinging to bulbous neck and torso.Flexibility surprising despite vast toughness.

“At bottom of torso rough but dissimilarly functioning counterparts ofhead arrangements exist. Bulbous light-grey pseudo-neck, without gill suggestions, holds greenishfive-pointed starfish-arrangement. Tough, muscular arms 4 feet long and tapering from 7 inchesdiameter at base to about 2.5 at point. To each point is attached small end of a greenish five-veinedmembraneous triangle 8 inches long and 6 wide at farther end. This is the paddle, fin, or pseudo-footwhich has made prints in rocks from a thousand million to fifty or sixty million years old.From inner angles of starfish-arrangement project two-foot reddish tubes tapering from 3 inchesdiameter at base to 1 at tip. Orifices at tips. All these parts infinitely tough and leathery,but extremely flexible. Four-foot arms with paddles undoubtedly used for locomotion of somesort, marine or otherwise. When moved, display suggestions of exaggerated muscularity. As found,all these projections tightly folded over pseudo-neck and end of torso, corresponding to projectionsat other end.

“Cannot yet assign positively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but oddsnow favour animal. Probably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata without lossof certain primitive features. Echinoderm resemblances unmistakable despite local contradictoryevidences. Wing structure puzzles in view of probable marine habitat, but may have use in waternavigation. Symmetry is curiously vegetable-like, suggesting vegetable’s essentially up-and-downstructure rather than animal’s fore-and-aft structure. Fabulously early date of evolution,preceding even simplest Archaean protozoa hitherto known, baffles all conjecture as to origin.

“Complete specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creaturesof primal myth that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic becomes inevitable. Dyerand Pabodie have read Necronomicon and seen Clark Ashton Smith’s nightmare paintingsbased on text, and will understand when I speak of Elder Things supposed to have created allearth-life as jest or mistake. Students have always thought conception formed from morbid imaginativetreatment of very ancient tropical radiata. Also like prehistoric folklore things Wilmarth hasspoken of—Cthulhu cult appendages, etc.

“Vast field of study opened. Deposits probably of late Cretaceous orearly Eocene period, judging from associated specimens. Massive stalagmites deposited abovethem. Hard work hewing out, but toughness prevented damage. State of preservation miraculous,evidently owing to limestone action. No more found so far, but will resume search later. Jobnow to get fourteen huge specimens to camp without dogs, which bark furiously and can’tbe trusted near them. With nine men—three left to guard the dogs—we ought to managethe three sledges fairly well, though wind is bad. Must establish plane communication with McMurdoSound and begin shipping material. But I’ve got to dissect one of these things beforewe take any rest. Wish I had a real laboratory here. Dyer better kick himself for having triedto stop my westward trip. First the world’s greatest mountains, and then this. If thislast isn’t the high spot of the expedition, I don’t know what is. We’re madescientifically. Congrats, Pabodie, on the drill that opened up the cave. Now will Arkhamplease repeat description?”The sensations of Pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were almostbeyond description, nor were our companions much behind us in enthusiasm. McTighe, who had hastilytranslated a few high spots as they came from the droning receiving set, wrote out the entiremessage from his shorthand version as soon as Lake’s operator signed off. All appreciatedthe epoch-making significance of the discovery, and I sent Lake congratulations as soon as theArkham’s operator had repeated back the descriptive parts as requested; and myexample was followed by Sherman from his station at the McMurdo Sound supply cache, as wellas by Capt. Douglas of the Arkham. Later, as head of the expedition, I added some remarksto be relayed through the Arkham to the outside world. Of course, rest was an absurdthought amidst this excitement; and my only wish was to get to Lake’s camp as quicklyas I could. It disappointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale made early aërialtravel impossible.

But within an hour and a half interest again rose to banish disappointment.Lake was sending more messages, and told of the completely successful transportation of thefourteen great specimens to the camp. It had been a hard pull, for the things were surprisinglyheavy; but nine men had accomplished it very neatly. Now some of the party were hurriedly buildinga snow corral at a safe distance from the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greaterconvenience in feeding. The specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the camp, save forone on which Lake was making crude attempts at dissection.

This dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expected; for despitethe heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised laboratory tent, the deceptively flexible tissuesof the chosen specimen—a powerful and intact one—lost nothing of their more thanleathery toughness. Lake was puzzled as to how he might make the requisite incisions withoutviolence destructive enough to upset all the structural niceties he was looking for. He had,it is true, seven more perfect specimens; but these were too few to use up recklessly unlessthe cave might later yield an unlimited supply. Accordingly he removed the specimen and draggedin one which, though having remnants of the starfish-arrangements at both ends, was badly crushedand partly disrupted along one of the great torso furrows.

Results, quickly reported over the wireless, were baffling and provocativeindeed. Nothing like delicacy or accuracy was possible with instruments hardly able to cut theanomalous tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all awed and bewildered. Existingbiology would have to be wholly revised, for this thing was no product of any cell-growth scienceknows about. There had been scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhapsforty million years the internal organs were wholly intact. The leathery, undeteriorative, andalmost indestructible quality was an inherent attribute of the thing’s form of organisation;and pertained to some palaeogean cycle of invertebrate evolution utterly beyond our powers ofspeculation. At first all that Lake found was dry, but as the heated tent produced its thawingeffect, organic moisture of pungent and offensive odour was encountered toward the thing’suninjured side. It was not blood, but a thick, dark-green fluid apparently answering the samepurpose. By the time Lake reached this stage all 37 dogs had been brought to the still uncompletedcorral near the camp; and even at that distance set up a savage barking and show of restlessnessat the acrid, diffusive smell.

Far from helping to place the strange entity, this provisional dissection merelydeepened its mystery. All guesses about its external members had been correct, and on the evidenceof these one could hardly hesitate to call the thing animal; but internal inspection broughtup so many vegetable evidences that Lake was left hopelessly at sea. It had digestion and circulation,and eliminated waste matter through the reddish tubes of its starfish-shaped base. Cursorily,one would say that its respiratory apparatus handled oxygen rather than carbon dioxide; andthere were odd evidences of air-storage chambers and methods of shifting respiration from theexternal orifice to at least two other fully developed breathing-systems—gills and pores.Clearly, it was amphibian and probably adapted to long airless hibernation-periods as well.Vocal organs seemed present in connexion with the main respiratory system, but they presentedanomalies beyond immediate solution. Articulate speech, in the sense of syllable-utterance,seemed barely conceivable; but musical piping notes covering a wide range were highly probable.The muscular system was almost preternaturally developed.

The nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to leave Lake aghast.Though excessively primitive and archaic in some respects, the thing had a set of ganglial centresand connectives arguing the very extremes of specialised development. Its five-lobed brain wassurprisingly advanced; and there were signs of a sensory equipment, served in part through thewiry cilia of the head, involving factors alien to any other terrestrial organism. Probablyit had more than five senses, so that its habits could not be predicted from any existing analogy.It must, Lake thought, have been a creature of keen sensitiveness and delicately differentiatedfunctions in its primal world; much like the ants and bees of today. It reproduced like thevegetable cryptogams, especially the pteridophytes; having spore-cases at the tips of the wingsand evidently developing from a thallus or prothallus.

But to give it a name at this stage was mere folly. It looked like a radiate,but was clearly something more. It was partly vegetable, but had three-fourths of the essentialsof animal structure. That it was marine in origin, its symmetrical contour and certain otherattributes clearly indicated; yet one could not be exact as to the limit of its later adaptations.The wings, after all, held a persistent suggestion of the aërial. How it could have undergoneits tremendously complex evolution on a new-born earth in time to leave prints in Archaean rockswas so far beyond conception as to make Lake whimsically recall the primal myths about GreatOld Ones who filtered down from the stars and concocted earth-life as a joke or mistake; andthe wild tales of cosmic hill things from Outside told by a folklorist colleague in Miskatonic’sEnglish department.

Naturally, he considered the possibility of the pre-Cambrian prints’having been made by a less evolved ancestor of the present specimens; but quickly rejected thistoo facile theory upon considering the advanced structural qualities of the older fossils. Ifanything, the later contours shewed decadence rather than higher evolution. The size of thepseudo-feet had decreased, and the whole morphology seemed coarsened and simplified. Moreover,the nerves and organs just examined held singular suggestions of retrogression from forms stillmore complex. Atrophied and vestigial parts were surprisingly prevalent. Altogether, littlecould be said to have been solved; and Lake fell back on mythology for a provisional name—jocoselydubbing his finds “The Elder Ones”.

At about 2:30 A.M., having decided to postpone further work and get a littlerest, he covered the dissected organism with a tarpaulin, emerged from the laboratory tent,and studied the intact specimens with renewed interest. The ceaseless antarctic sun had begunto limber up their tissues a trifle, so that the head-points and tubes of two or three shewedsigns of unfolding; but Lake did not believe there was any danger of immediate decompositionin the almost sub-zero air. He did, however, move all the undissected specimens closer togetherand throw a spare tent over them in order to keep off the direct solar rays. That would alsohelp to keep their possible scent away from the dogs, whose hostile unrest was really becominga problem even at their substantial distance and behind the higher and higher snow walls whichan increased quota of the men were hastening to raise around their quarters. He had to weightdown the corners of the tent-cloth with heavy blocks of snow to hold it in place amidst therising gale, for the titan mountains seemed about to deliver some gravely severe blasts. Earlyapprehensions about sudden antarctic winds were revived, and under Atwood’s supervisionprecautions were taken to bank the tents, new dog-corral, and crude aëroplane shelterswith snow on the mountainward side. These latter shelters, begun with hard snow blocks duringodd moments, were by no means as high as they should have been; and Lake finally detached allhands from other tasks to work on them.

It was after four when Lake at last prepared to sign off and advised us allto share the rest period his outfit would take when the shelter walls were a little higher.He held some friendly chat with Pabodie over the ether, and repeated his praise of the reallymarvellous drills that had helped him make his discovery. Atwood also sent greetings and praises.I gave Lake a warm word of congratulation, owning up that he was right about the western trip;and we all agreed to get in touch by wireless at ten in the morning. If the gale was then over,Lake would send a plane for the party at my base. Just before retiring I despatched a finalmessage to the Arkham with instructions about toning down the day’s news for theoutside world, since the full details seemed radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity untilfurther substantiated.

III.

None of us, I imagine, slept very heavily or continuously that morning; for both the excitementof Lake’s discovery and the mounting fury of the wind were against such a thing. So savagewas the blast, even where we were, that we could not help wondering how much worse it was atLake’s camp, directly under the vast unknown peaks that bred and delivered it. McTighewas awake at ten o’clock and tried to get Lake on the wireless, as agreed, but some electricalcondition in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent communication. We did, however,get the Arkham, and Douglas told me that he had likewise been vainly trying to reachLake. He had not known about the wind, for very little was blowing at McMurdo Sound despiteits persistent rage where we were.

Throughout the day we all listened anxiously and tried to get Lake at intervals,but invariably without results. About noon a positive frenzy of wind stampeded out of the west,causing us to fear for the safety of our camp; but it eventually died down, with only a moderaterelapse at 2 P.M. After three o’clock it was very quiet, and we redoubled our effortsto get Lake. Reflecting that he had four planes, each provided with an excellent short-waveoutfit, we could not imagine any ordinary accident capable of crippling all his wireless equipmentat once. Nevertheless the stony silence continued; and when we thought of the delirious forcethe wind must have had in his locality we could not help making the most direful conjectures.

By six o’clock our fears had become intense and definite, and after awireless consultation with Douglas and Thorfinnssen I resolved to take steps toward investigation.The fifth aëroplane, which we had left at the McMurdo Sound supply cache with Sherman andtwo sailors, was in good shape and ready for instant use; and it seemed that the very emergencyfor which it had been saved was now upon us. I got Sherman by wireless and ordered him to joinme with the plane and the two sailors at the southern base as quickly as possible; the air conditionsbeing apparently highly favourable. We then talked over the personnel of the coming investigationparty; and decided that we would include all hands, together with the sledge and dogs whichI had kept with me. Even so great a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes builtto our especial orders for heavy machinery transportation. At intervals I still tried to reachLake with the wireless, but all to no purpose.

Sherman, with the sailors Gunnarsson and Larsen, took off at 7:30; and reporteda quiet flight from several points on the wing. They arrived at our base at midnight, and allhands at once discussed the next move. It was risky business sailing over the antarctic in asingle aëroplane without any line of bases, but no one drew back from what seemed likethe plainest necessity. We turned in at two o’clock for a brief rest after some preliminaryloading of the plane, but were up again in four hours to finish the loading and packing.

At 7:15 A.M., January 25th, we started flying northwestward under McTighe’spilotage with ten men, seven dogs, a sledge, a fuel and food supply, and other items includingthe plane’s wireless outfit. The atmosphere was clear, fairly quiet, and relatively mildin temperature; and we anticipated very little trouble in reaching the latitude and longitudedesignated by Lake as the site of his camp. Our apprehensions were over what we might find,or fail to find, at the end of our journey; for silence continued to answer all calls despatchedto the camp.

Every incident of that four-and-a-half-hour flight is burned into my recollectionbecause of its crucial position in my life. It marked my loss, at the age of fifty-four, ofall that peace and balance which the normal mind possesses through its accustomed conceptionof external Nature and Nature’s laws. Thenceforward the ten of us—but the studentDanforth and myself above all others—were to face a hideously amplified world of lurkinghorrors which nothing can erase from our emotions, and which we would refrain from sharing withmankind in general if we could. The newspapers have printed the bulletins we sent from the movingplane; telling of our non-stop course, our two battles with treacherous upper-air gales, ourglimpse of the broken surface where Lake had sunk his mid-journey shaft three days before, andour sight of a group of those strange fluffy snow-cylinders noted by Amundsen and Byrd as rollingin the wind across the endless leagues of frozen plateau. There came a point, though, when oursensations could not be conveyed in any words the press would understand; and a later pointwhen we had to adopt an actual rule of strict censorship.

The sailor Larsen was first to spy the jagged line of witch-like cones andpinnacles ahead, and his shouts sent everyone to the windows of the great cabined plane. Despiteour speed, they were very slow in gaining prominence; hence we knew that they must be infinitelyfar off, and visible only because of their abnormal height. Little by little, however, theyrose grimly into the western sky; allowing us to distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits,and to catch the curious sense of phantasy which they inspired as seen in the reddish antarcticlight against the provocative background of iridescent ice-dust clouds. In the whole spectaclethere was a persistent, pervasive hint of stupendous secrecy and potential revelation; as ifthese stark, nightmare spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway into forbidden spheresof dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space, and ultra-dimensionality. I could not helpfeeling that they were evil things—mountains of madness whose farther slopes looked outover some accursed ultimate abyss. That seething, half-luminous cloud-background held ineffablesuggestions of a vague, ethereal beyondness far more than terrestrially spatial; andgave appalling reminders of the utter remoteness, separateness, desolation, and aeon-long deathof this untrodden and unfathomed austral world.

It was young Danforth who drew our notice to the curious regularities of thehigher mountain skyline—regularities like clinging fragments of perfect cubes, which Lakehad mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified his comparison with the dream-likesuggestions of primordial temple-ruins on cloudy Asian mountain-tops so subtly and strangelypainted by Roerich. There was indeed something hauntingly Roerich-like about this whole unearthlycontinent of mountainous mystery. I had felt it in October when we first caught sight of VictoriaLand, and I felt it afresh now. I felt, too, another wave of uneasy consciousness of Archaeanmythical resemblances; of how disturbingly this lethal realm corresponded to the evilly famedplateau of Leng in the primal writings. Mythologists have placed Leng in Central Asia; but theracial memory of man—or of his predecessors—is long, and it may well be that certaintales have come down from lands and mountains and temples of horror earlier than Asia and earlierthan any human world we know. A few daring mystics have hinted at a pre-Pleistocene origin forthe fragmentary Pnakotic Manuscripts, and have suggested that the devotees of Tsathoggua wereas alien to mankind as Tsathoggua itself. Leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, wasnot a region I would care to be in or near; nor did I relish the proximity of a world that hadever bred such ambiguous and Archaean monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned. At themoment I felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred Necronomicon, or talked so muchwith that unpleasantly erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the university.

This mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the bizarre miragewhich burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zenith as we drew near the mountains andbegan to make out the cumulative undulations of the foothills. I had seen dozens of polar miragesduring the preceding weeks, some of them quite as uncanny and fantastically vivid as the presentsample; but this one had a wholly novel and obscure quality of menacing symbolism, and I shudderedas the seething labyrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets loomed out of the troubledice-vapours above our heads.

The effect was that of a Cyclopean city of no architecture known to man orto human imagination, with vast aggregations of night-black masonry embodying monstrous perversionsof geometrical laws and attaining the most grotesque extremes of sinister bizarrerie. Therewere truncated cones, sometimes terraced or fluted, surmounted by tall cylindrical shafts hereand there bulbously enlarged and often capped with tiers of thinnish scalloped discs; and strange,beetling, table-like constructions suggesting piles of multitudinous rectangular slabs or circularplates or five-pointed stars with each one overlapping the one beneath. There were compositecones and pyramids either alone or surmounting cylinders or cubes or flatter truncated conesand pyramids, and occasional needle-like spires in curious clusters of five. All of these febrilestructures seemed knit together by tubular bridges crossing from one to the other at variousdizzy heights, and the implied scale of the whole was terrifying and oppressive in its sheergiganticism. The general type of mirage was not unlike some of the wilder forms observed anddrawn by the Arctic whaler Scoresby in 1820; but at this time and place, with those dark, unknownmountain peaks soaring stupendously ahead, that anomalous elder-world discovery in our minds,and the pall of probable disaster enveloping the greater part of our expedition, we all seemedto find in it a taint of latent malignity and infinitely evil portent.

I was glad when the mirage began to break up, though in the process the variousnightmare turrets and cones assumed distorted temporary forms of even vaster hideousness. Asthe whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence we began to look earthward again, and sawthat our journey’s end was not far off. The unknown mountains ahead rose dizzyingly uplike a fearsome rampart of giants, their curious regularities shewing with startling clearnesseven without a field-glass. We were over the lowest foothills now, and could see amidst thesnow, ice, and bare patches of their main plateau a couple of darkish spots which we took tobe Lake’s camp and boring. The higher foothills shot up between five and six miles away,forming a range almost distinct from the terrifying line of more than Himalayan peaks beyondthem. At length Ropes—the student who had relieved McTighe at the controls—beganto head downward toward the left-hand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp. As he didso, McTighe sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was to receive from ourexpedition.

Everyone, of course, has read the brief and unsatisfying bulletins of the restof our antarctic sojourn. Some hours after our landing we sent a guarded report of the tragedywe found, and reluctantly announced the wiping out of the whole Lake party by the frightfulwind of the preceding day, or of the night before that. Eleven known dead, young Gedney missing.People pardoned our hazy lack of details through realisation of the shock the sad event musthave caused us, and believed us when we explained that the mangling action of the wind had renderedall eleven bodies unsuitable for transportation outside. Indeed, I flatter myself that evenin the midst of our distress, utter bewilderment, and soul-clutching horror, we scarcely wentbeyond the truth in any specific instance. The tremendous significance lies in what we darednot tell—what I would not tell now but for the need of warning others off from namelessterrors.

It is a fact that the wind had wrought dreadful havoc. Whether all could havelived through it, even without the other thing, is gravely open to doubt. The storm, with itsfury of madly driven ice-particles, must have been beyond anything our expedition had encounteredbefore. One aëroplane shelter—all, it seems, had been left in a far too flimsy andinadequate state—was nearly pulverised; and the derrick at the distant boring was entirelyshaken to pieces. The exposed metal of the grounded planes and drilling machinery was bruisedinto a high polish, and two of the small tents were flattened despite their snow banking. Woodensurfaces left out in the blast were pitted and denuded of paint, and all signs of tracks inthe snow were completely obliterated. It is also true that we found none of the Archaean biologicalobjects in a condition to take outside as a whole. We did gather some minerals from a vast tumbledpile, including several of the greenish soapstone fragments whose odd five-pointed roundingand faint patterns of grouped dots caused so many doubtful comparisons; and some fossil bones,among which were the most typical of the curiously injured specimens.

None of the dogs survived, their hurriedly built snow enclosure near the campbeing almost wholly destroyed. The wind may have done that, though the greater breakage on theside next the camp, which was not the windward one, suggests an outward leap or break of thefrantic beasts themselves. All three sledges were gone, and we have tried to explain that thewind may have blown them off into the unknown. The drill and ice-melting machinery at the boringwere too badly damaged to warrant salvage, so we used them to choke up that subtly disturbinggateway to the past which Lake had blasted. We likewise left at the camp the two most shaken-upof the planes; since our surviving party had only four real pilots—Sherman, Danforth,McTighe, and Ropes—in all, with Danforth in a poor nervous shape to navigate. We broughtback all the books, scientific equipment, and other incidentals we could find, though much wasrather unaccountably blown away. Spare tents and furs were either missing or badly out of condition.

It was approximately 4 P.M., after wide plane cruising had forced us to giveGedney up for lost, that we sent our guarded message to the Arkham for relaying; andI think we did well to keep it as calm and non-committal as we succeeded in doing. The mostwe said about agitation concerned our dogs, whose frantic uneasiness near the biological specimenswas to be expected from poor Lake’s accounts. We did not mention, I think, their displayof the same uneasiness when sniffing around the queer greenish soapstones and certain otherobjects in the disordered region; objects including scientific instruments, aëroplanes,and machinery both at the camp and at the boring, whose parts had been loosened, moved, or otherwisetampered with by winds that must have harboured singular curiosity and investigativeness.

About the fourteen biological specimens we were pardonably indefinite. We saidthat the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough was left of them to prove Lake’sdescription wholly and impressively accurate. It was hard work keeping our personal emotionsout of this matter—and we did not mention numbers or say exactly how we had found thosewhich we did find. We had by that time agreed not to transmit anything suggesting madness onthe part of Lake’s men, and it surely looked like madness to find six imperfect monstrositiescarefully buried upright in nine-foot snow graves under five-pointed mounds punched over withgroups of dots in patterns exactly like those on the queer greenish soapstones dug up from Mesozoicor Tertiary times. The eight perfect specimens mentioned by Lake seemed to have been completelyblown away. 

We were careful, too, about the public’s general peace of mind; henceDanforth and I said little about that frightful trip over the mountains the next day. It wasthe fact that only a radically lightened plane could possibly cross a range of such height whichmercifully limited that scouting tour to the two of us. On our return at 1 A.M. Danforth wasclose to hysterics, but kept an admirably stiff upper lip. It took no persuasion to make himpromise not to shew our sketches and the other things we brought away in our pockets, not tosay anything more to the others than what we had agreed to relay outside, and to hide our camerafilms for private development later on; so that part of my present story will be as new to Pabodie,McTighe, Ropes, Sherman, and the rest as it will be to the world in general. Indeed—Danforthis closer mouthed than I; for he saw—or thinks he saw—one thing he will not telleven me.

As all know, our report included a tale of a hard ascent; a confirmation ofLake’s opinion that the great peaks are of Archaean slate and other very primal crumpledstrata unchanged since at least middle Comanchian times; a conventional comment on the regularityof the clinging cube and rampart formations; a decision that the cave-mouths indicate dissolvedcalcareous veins; a conjecture that certain slopes and passes would permit of the scaling andcrossing of the entire range by seasoned mountaineers; and a remark that the mysterious otherside holds a lofty and immense super-plateau as ancient and unchanging as the mountains themselves—20,000feet in elevation, with grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial layer andwith low gradual foothills between the general plateau surface and the sheer precipices of thehighest peaks.

This body of data is in every respect true so far as it goes, and it completelysatisfied the men at the camp. We laid our absence of sixteen hours—a longer time thanour announced flying, landing, reconnoitring, and rock-collecting programme called for—toa long mythical spell of adverse wind conditions; and told truly of our landing on the fartherfoothills. Fortunately our tale sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to tempt any of theothers into emulating our flight. Had any tried to do that, I would have used every ounce ofmy persuasion to stop them—and I do not know what Danforth would have done. While we weregone, Pabodie, Sherman, Ropes, McTighe, and Williamson had worked like beavers over Lake’stwo best planes; fitting them again for use despite the altogether unaccountable juggling oftheir operative mechanism.

We decided to load all the planes the next morning and start back for our oldbase as soon as possible. Even though indirect, that was the safest way to work toward McMurdoSound; for a straight-line flight across the most utterly unknown stretches of the aeon-deadcontinent would involve many additional hazards. Further exploration was hardly feasible inview of our tragic decimation and the ruin of our drilling machinery; and the doubts and horrorsaround us—which we did not reveal—made us wish only to escape from this australworld of desolation and brooding madness as swiftly as we could.

As the public knows, our return to the world was accomplished without furtherdisasters. All planes reached the old base on the evening of the next day—January 27th—aftera swift non-stop flight; and on the 28th we made McMurdo Sound in two laps, the one pause beingvery brief, and occasioned by a faulty rudder in the furious wind over the ice-shelf after wehad cleared the great plateau. In five days more the Arkham and Miskatonic, withall hands and equipment on board, were shaking clear of the thickening field ice and workingup Ross Sea with the mocking mountains of Victoria Land looming westward against a troubledantarctic sky and twisting the wind’s wails into a wide-ranged musical piping which chilledmy soul to the quick. Less than a fortnight later we left the last hint of polar land behindus, and thanked heaven that we were clear of a haunted, accursed realm where life and death,space and time, have made black and blasphemous alliances in the unknown epochs since matterfirst writhed and swam on the planet’s scarce-cooled crust.

Since our return we have all constantly worked to discourage antarctic exploration,and have kept certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with splendid unity and faithfulness.Even young Danforth, with his nervous breakdown, has not flinched or babbled to his doctors—indeed,as I have said, there is one thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not tell even me, thoughI think it would help his psychological state if he would consent to do so. It might explainand relieve much, though perhaps the thing was no more than the delusive aftermath of an earliershock. That is the impression I gather after those rare irresponsible moments when he whispersdisjointed things to me—things which he repudiates vehemently as soon as he gets a gripon himself again.

It will be hard work deterring others from the great white south, and someof our efforts may directly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice. We might have knownfrom the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the results we announced would be enoughto spur others ahead on the same age-long pursuit of the unknown. Lake’s reports of thosebiological monstrosities had aroused naturalists and palaeontologists to the highest pitch;though we were sensible enough not to shew the detached parts we had taken from the actual buriedspecimens, or our photographs of those specimens as they were found. We also refrained fromshewing the more puzzling of the scarred bones and greenish soapstones; while Danforth and Ihave closely guarded the pictures we took or drew on the super-plateau across the range, andthe crumpled things we smoothed, studied in terror, and brought away in our pockets. But nowthat Starkweather-Moore party is organising, and with a thoroughness far beyond anything ouroutfit attempted. If not dissuaded, they will get to the innermost nucleus of the antarcticand melt and bore till they bring up that which may end the world we know. So I must break throughall reticences at last—even about that ultimate nameless thing beyond the mountains ofmadness.

IV.

It is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that I let my mind go back to Lake’s campand what we really found there—and to that other thing beyond the frightful mountain wall.I am constantly tempted to shirk the details, and to let hints stand for actual facts and ineluctabledeductions. I hope I have said enough already to let me glide briefly over the rest; the rest,that is, of the horror at the camp. I have told of the wind-ravaged terrain, the damaged shelters,the disarranged machinery, the varied uneasinesses of our dogs, the missing sledges and otheritems, the deaths of men and dogs, the absence of Gedney, and the six insanely buried biologicalspecimens, strangely sound in texture for all their structural injuries, from a world fortymillion years dead. I do not recall whether I mentioned that upon checking up the canine bodieswe found one dog missing. We did not think much about that till later—indeed, only Danforthand I have thought of it at all.

The principal things I have been keeping back relate to the bodies, and tocertain subtle points which may or may not lend a hideous and incredible kind of rationale tothe apparent chaos. At the time I tried to keep the men’s minds off those points; forit was so much simpler—so much more normal—to lay everything to an outbreak of madnesson the part of some of Lake’s party. From the look of things, that daemon mountain windmust have been enough to drive any man mad in the midst of this centre of all earthly mysteryand desolation.

The crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of the bodies—menand dogs alike. They had all been in some terrible kind of conflict, and were torn and mangledin fiendish and altogether inexplicable ways. Death, so far as we could judge, had in each casecome from strangulation or laceration. The dogs had evidently started the trouble, for thestate of their ill-built corral bore witness to its forcible breakage from within. It had beenset some distance from the camp because of the hatred of the animals for those hellish Archaeanorganisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in vain. When left alone in that monstrouswind behind flimsy walls of insufficient height they must have stampeded—whether fromthe wind itself, or from some subtle, increasing odour emitted by the nightmare specimens, onecould not say. Those specimens, of course, had been covered with a tent-cloth; yet the low antarcticsun had beat steadily upon that cloth, and Lake had mentioned that solar heat tended to makethe strangely sound and tough tissues of the things relax and expand. Perhaps the wind had whippedthe cloth from over them, and jostled them about in such a way that their more pungent olfactoryqualities became manifest despite their unbelievable antiquity.

But whatever had happened, it was hideous and revolting enough. Perhaps I hadbetter put squeamishness aside and tell the worst at last—though with a categorical statementof opinion, based on the first-hand observations and most rigid deductions of both Danforthand myself, that the then missing Gedney was in no way responsible for the loathsome horrorswe found. I have said that the bodies were frightfully mangled. Now I must add that some wereincised and subtracted from in the most curious, cold-blooded, and inhuman fashion. It was thesame with dogs and men. All the healthier, fatter bodies, quadrupedal or bipedal, had had theirmost solid masses of tissue cut out and removed, as by a careful butcher; and around them wasa strange sprinkling of salt—taken from the ravaged provision-chests on the planes—whichconjured up the most horrible associations. The thing had occurred in one of the crude aëroplaneshelters from which the plane had been dragged out, and subsequent winds had effaced all trackswhich could have supplied any plausible theory. Scattered bits of clothing, roughly slashedfrom the human incision-subjects, hinted no clues. It is useless to bring up the half-impressionof certain faint snow-prints in one shielded corner of the ruined enclosure—because thatimpression did not concern human prints at all, but was clearly mixed up with all the talk offossil prints which poor Lake had been giving throughout the preceding weeks. One had to becareful of one’s imagination in the lee of those overshadowing mountains of madness.

As I have indicated, Gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in the end.When we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs and two men; but the fairly unharmeddissecting tent, which we entered after investigating the monstrous graves, had something toreveal. It was not as Lake had left it, for the covered parts of the primal monstrosity hadbeen removed from the improvised table. Indeed, we had already realised that one of the siximperfect and insanely buried things we had found—the one with the trace of a peculiarlyhateful odour—must represent the collected sections of the entity which Lake had triedto analyse. On and around that laboratory table were strown other things, and it did not takelong for us to guess that those things were the carefully though oddly and inexpertly dissectedparts of one man and one dog. I shall spare the feelings of survivors by omitting mention ofthe man’s identity. Lake’s anatomical instruments were missing, but there were evidencesof their careful cleansing. The gasoline stove was also gone, though around it we found a curiouslitter of matches. We buried the human parts beside the other ten men, and the canine partswith the other 35 dogs. Concerning the bizarre smudges on the laboratory table, and on the jumbleof roughly handled illustrated books scattered near it, we were much too bewildered to speculate.

This formed the worst of the camp horror, but other things were equally perplexing.The disappearance of Gedney, the one dog, the eight uninjured biological specimens, the threesledges, and certain instruments, illustrated technical and scientific books, writing materials,electric torches and batteries, food and fuel, heating apparatus, spare tents, fur suits, andthe like, was utterly beyond sane conjecture; as were likewise the spatter-fringed ink-blotson certain pieces of paper, and the evidences of curious alien fumbling and experimentationaround the planes and all other mechanical devices both at the camp and at the boring. The dogsseemed to abhor this oddly disordered machinery. Then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder,the disappearance of certain staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans pried openin the most unlikely ways and at the most unlikely places. The profusion of scattered matches,intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor enigma; as did the two or three tent-cloths andfur suits which we found lying about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably dueto clumsy efforts at unimaginable adaptations. The maltreatment of the human and canine bodies,and the crazy burial of the damaged Archaean specimens, were all of a piece with this apparentdisintegrative madness. In view of just such an eventuality as the present one, we carefullyphotographed all the main evidences of insane disorder at the camp; and shall use the printsto buttress our pleas against the departure of the proposed Starkweather-Moore Expedition.

Our first act after finding the bodies in the shelter was to photograph andopen the row of insane graves with the five-pointed snow mounds. We could not help noticingthe resemblance of these monstrous mounds, with their clusters of grouped dots, to poor Lake’sdescriptions of the strange greenish soapstones; and when we came on some of the soapstonesthemselves in the great mineral pile we found the likeness very close indeed. The whole generalformation, it must be made clear, seemed abominably suggestive of the starfish-head of the Archaeanentities; and we agreed that the suggestion must have worked potently upon the sensitised mindsof Lake’s overwrought party. Our own first sight of the actual buried entities formeda horrible moment, and sent the imaginations of Pabodie and myself back to some of the shockingprimal myths we had read and heard. We all agreed that the mere sight and continued presenceof the things must have coöperated with the oppressive polar solitude and daemon mountainwind in driving Lake’s party mad.

For madness—centring in Gedney as the only possible surviving agent—wasthe explanation spontaneously adopted by everybody so far as spoken utterance was concerned;though I will not be so naive as to deny that each of us may have harboured wild guesses whichsanity forbade him to formulate completely. Sherman, Pabodie, and McTighe made an exhaustiveaëroplane cruise over all the surrounding territory in the afternoon, sweeping the horizonwith field-glasses in quest of Gedney and of the various missing things; but nothing came tolight. The party reported that the titan barrier range extended endlessly to right and leftalike, without any diminution in height or essential structure. On some of the peaks, though,the regular cube and rampart formations were bolder and plainer; having doubly fantastic similitudesto Roerich-painted Asian hill ruins. The distribution of cryptical cave-mouths on the blacksnow-denuded summits seemed roughly even as far as the range could be traced.

In spite of all the prevailing horrors we were left with enough sheer scientificzeal and adventurousness to wonder about the unknown realm beyond those mysterious mountains.As our guarded messages stated, we rested at midnight after our day of terror and bafflement;but not without a tentative plan for one or more range-crossing altitude flights in a lightenedplane with aërial camera and geologist’s outfit, beginning the following morning.It was decided that Danforth and I try it first, and we awaked at 7 A.M. intending an earlytrip; though heavy winds—mentioned in our brief bulletin to the outside world—delayedour start till nearly nine o’clock.

I have already repeated the non-committal story we told the men at camp—andrelayed outside—after our return sixteen hours later. It is now my terrible duty to amplifythis account by filling in the merciful blanks with hints of what we really saw in the hiddentrans-montane world—hints of the revelations which have finally driven Danforth to a nervouscollapse. I wish he would add a really frank word about the thing which he thinks he alone saw—eventhough it was probably a nervous delusion—and which was perhaps the last straw that puthim where he is; but he is firm against that. All I can do is to repeat his later disjointedwhispers about what set him shrieking as the plane soared back through the wind-tortured mountainpass after that real and tangible shock which I shared. This will form my last word. If theplain signs of surviving elder horrors in what I disclose be not enough to keep others frommeddling with the inner antarctic—or at least from prying too deeply beneath the surfaceof that ultimate waste of forbidden secrets and unhuman, aeon-cursed desolation—the responsibilityfor unnamable and perhaps immensurable evils will not be mine.

Danforth and I, studying the notes made by Pabodie in his afternoon flightand checking up with a sextant, had calculated that the lowest available pass in the range laysomewhat to the right of us, within sight of camp, and about 23,000 or 24,000 feet above sea-level.For this point, then, we first headed in the lightened plane as we embarked on our flight ofdiscovery. The camp itself, on foothills which sprang from a high continental plateau, was some12,000 feet in altitude; hence the actual height increase necessary was not so vast as it mightseem. Nevertheless we were acutely conscious of the rarefied air and intense cold as we rose;for on account of visibility conditions we had to leave the cabin windows open. We were dressed,of course, in our heaviest furs.

As we drew near the forbidding peaks, dark and sinister above the line of crevasse-rivensnow and interstitial glaciers, we noticed more and more the curiously regular formations clingingto the slopes; and thought again of the strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich. The ancientand wind-weathered rock strata fully verified all of Lake’s bulletins, and proved thatthese hoary pinnacles had been towering up in exactly the same way since a surprisingly earlytime in earth’s history—perhaps over fifty million years. How much higher they hadonce been, it was futile to guess; but everything about this strange region pointed to obscureatmospheric influences unfavourable to change, and calculated to retard the usual climatic processesof rock disintegration.

But it was the mountainside tangle of regular cubes, ramparts, and cave-mouthswhich fascinated and disturbed us most. I studied them with a field-glass and took aërialphotographs whilst Danforth drove; and at times relieved him at the controls—though myaviation knowledge was purely an amateur’s—in order to let him use the binoculars.We could easily see that much of the material of the things was a lightish Archaean quartzite,unlike any formation visible over broad areas of the general surface; and that their regularitywas extreme and uncanny to an extent which poor Lake had scarcely hinted.

As he had said, their edges were crumbled and rounded from untold aeons ofsavage weathering; but their preternatural solidity and tough material had saved them from obliteration.Many parts, especially those closest to the slopes, seemed identical in substance with the surroundingrock surface. The whole arrangement looked like the ruins of Machu Picchu in the Andes, or theprimal foundation-walls of Kish as dug up by the Oxford–Field Museum Expedition in 1929;and both Danforth and I obtained that occasional impression of separate Cyclopean blockswhich Lake had attributed to his flight-companion Carroll. How to account for such things inthis place was frankly beyond me, and I felt queerly humbled as a geologist. Igneous formationsoften have strange regularities—like the famous Giants’ Causeway in Ireland—butthis stupendous range, despite Lake’s original suspicion of smoking cones, was above allelse non-volcanic in evident structure.

The curious cave-mouths, near which the odd formations seemed most abundant,presented another albeit a lesser puzzle because of their regularity of outline. They were,as Lake’s bulletin had said, often approximately square or semicircular; as if the naturalorifices had been shaped to greater symmetry by some magic hand. Their numerousness and widedistribution were remarkable, and suggested that the whole region was honeycombed with tunnelsdissolved out of limestone strata. Such glimpses as we secured did not extend far within thecaverns, but we saw that they were apparently clear of stalactites and stalagmites. Outside,those parts of the mountain slopes adjoining the apertures seemed invariably smooth and regular;and Danforth thought that the slight cracks and pittings of the weathering tended toward unusualpatterns. Filled as he was with the horrors and strangenesses discovered at the camp, he hintedthat the pittings vaguely resembled those baffling groups of dots sprinkled over the primevalgreenish soapstones, so hideously duplicated on the madly conceived snow mounds above thosesix buried monstrosities.

We had risen gradually in flying over the higher foothills and along towardthe relatively low pass we had selected. As we advanced we occasionally looked down at the snowand ice of the land route, wondering whether we could have attempted the trip with the simplerequipment of earlier days. Somewhat to our surprise we saw that the terrain was far from difficultas such things go; and that despite the crevasses and other bad spots it would not have beenlikely to deter the sledges of a Scott, a Shackleton, or an Amundsen. Some of the glaciers appearedto lead up to wind-bared passes with unusual continuity, and upon reaching our chosen pass wefound that its case formed no exception.

Our sensations of tense expectancy as we prepared to round the crest and peerout over an untrodden world can hardly be described on paper; even though we had no cause tothink the regions beyond the range essentially different from those already seen and traversed.The touch of evil mystery in these barrier mountains, and in the beckoning sea of opalescentsky glimpsed betwixt their summits, was a highly subtle and attenuated matter not to be explainedin literal words. Rather was it an affair of vague psychological symbolism and aesthetic association—athing mixed up with exotic poetry and paintings, and with archaic myths lurking in shunned andforbidden volumes. Even the wind’s burden held a peculiar strain of conscious malignity;and for a second it seemed that the composite sound included a bizarre musical whistling orpiping over a wide range as the blast swept in and out of the omnipresent and resonant cave-mouths.There was a cloudy note of reminiscent repulsion in this sound, as complex and unplaceable asany of the other dark impressions.

We were now, after a slow ascent, at a height of 23,570 feet according to theaneroid; and had left the region of clinging snow definitely below us. Up here were only dark,bare rock slopes and the start of rough-ribbed glaciers—but with those provocative cubes,ramparts, and echoing cave-mouths to add a portent of the unnatural, the fantastic, and thedream-like. Looking along the line of high peaks, I thought I could see the one mentioned bypoor Lake, with a rampart exactly on top. It seemed to be half-lost in a queer antarctic haze;such a haze, perhaps, as had been responsible for Lake’s early notion of volcanism. Thepass loomed directly before us, smooth and windswept between its jagged and malignly frowningpylons. Beyond it was a sky fretted with swirling vapours and lighted by the low polar sun—thesky of that mysterious farther realm upon which we felt no human eye had ever gazed.

A few more feet of altitude and we would behold that realm. Danforth and I,unable to speak except in shouts amidst the howling, piping wind that raced through the passand added to the noise of the unmuffled engines, exchanged eloquent glances. And then, havinggained those last few feet, we did indeed stare across the momentous divide and over the unsampledsecrets of an elder and utterly alien earth.

V.

I think that both of us simultaneously cried out in mixed awe, wonder, terror, and disbeliefin our own senses as we finally cleared the pass and saw what lay beyond. Of course we musthave had some natural theory in the back of our heads to steady our faculties for the moment.Probably we thought of such things as the grotesquely weathered stones of the Garden of theGods in Colorado, or the fantastically symmetrical wind-carved rocks of the Arizona desert.Perhaps we even half thought the sight a mirage like that we had seen the morning before onfirst approaching those mountains of madness. We must have had some such normal notions to fallback upon as our eyes swept that limitless, tempest-scarred plateau and grasped the almost endlesslabyrinth of colossal, regular, and geometrically eurhythmic stone masses which reared theircrumbled and pitted crests above a glacial sheet not more than forty or fifty feet deep at itsthickest, and in places obviously thinner.

The effect of the monstrous sight was indescribable, for some fiendish violationof known natural law seemed certain at the outset. Here, on a hellishly ancient table-land fully20,000 feet high, and in a climate deadly to habitation since a pre-human age not less than500,000 years ago, there stretched nearly to the vision’s limit a tangle of orderly stonewhich only the desperation of mental self-defence could possibly attribute to any but a consciousand artificial cause. We had previously dismissed, so far as serious thought was concerned,any theory that the cubes and ramparts of the mountainsides were other than natural in origin.How could they be otherwise, when man himself could scarcely have been differentiated from thegreat apes at the time when this region succumbed to the present unbroken reign of glacial death?

Yet now the sway of reason seemed irrefutably shaken, for this Cyclopean mazeof squared, curved, and angled blocks had features which cut off all comfortable refuge. Itwas, very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage in stark, objective, and ineluctable reality.That damnable portent had had a material basis after all—there had been some horizontalstratum of ice-dust in the upper air, and this shocking stone survival had projected its imageacross the mountains according to the simple laws of reflection. Of course the phantom had beentwisted and exaggerated, and had contained things which the real source did not contain; yetnow, as we saw that real source, we thought it even more hideous and menacing than its distantimage.

Only the incredible, unhuman massiveness of these vast stone towers and rampartshad saved the frightful thing from utter annihilation in the hundreds of thousands—perhapsmillions—of years it had brooded there amidst the blasts of a bleak upland. “CoronaMundi&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Roof of the World&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” All sorts of fantasticphrases sprang to our lips as we looked dizzily down at the unbelievable spectacle. I thoughtagain of the eldritch primal myths that had so persistently haunted me since my first sightof this dead antarctic world—of the daemoniac plateau of Leng, of the Mi-Go, or AbominableSnow-Men of the Himalayas, of the Pnakotic Manuscripts with their pre-human implications, ofthe Cthulhu cult, of the Necronomicon, and of the Hyperborean legends of formless Tsathogguaand the worse than formless star-spawn associated with that semi-entity.

For boundless miles in every direction the thing stretched off with very littlethinning; indeed, as our eyes followed it to the right and left along the base of the low, gradualfoothills which separated it from the actual mountain rim, we decided that we could see no thinningat all except for an interruption at the left of the pass through which we had come. We hadmerely struck, at random, a limited part of something of incalculable extent. The foothillswere more sparsely sprinkled with grotesque stone structures, linking the terrible city to thealready familiar cubes and ramparts which evidently formed its mountain outposts. These latter,as well as the queer cave-mouths, were as thick on the inner as on the outer sides of the mountains.

The nameless stone labyrinth consisted, for the most part, of walls from 10to 150 feet in ice-clear height, and of a thickness varying from five to ten feet. It was composedmostly of prodigious blocks of dark primordial slate, schist, and sandstone—blocks inmany cases as large as 4 × 6 × 8 feet—though in several places it seemed tobe carved out of a solid, uneven bed-rock of pre-Cambrian slate. The buildings were far fromequal in size; there being innumerable honeycomb-arrangements of enormous extent as well assmaller separate structures. The general shape of these things tended to be conical, pyramidal,or terraced; though there were many perfect cylinders, perfect cubes, clusters of cubes, andother rectangular forms, and a peculiar sprinkling of angled edifices whose five-pointed groundplan roughly suggested modern fortifications. The builders had made constant and expert useof the principle of the arch, and domes had probably existed in the city’s heyday.

The whole tangle was monstrously weathered, and the glacial surface from whichthe towers projected was strewn with fallen blocks and immemorial debris. Where the glaciationwas transparent we could see the lower parts of the gigantic piles, and noticed the ice-preservedstone bridges which connected the different towers at varying distances above the ground. Onthe exposed walls we could detect the scarred places where other and higher bridges of the samesort had existed. Closer inspection revealed countless largish windows; some of which were closedwith shutters of a petrified material originally wood, though most gaped open in a sinisterand menacing fashion. Many of the ruins, of course, were roofless, and with uneven though wind-roundedupper edges; whilst others, of a more sharply conical or pyramidal model or else protected byhigher surrounding structures, preserved intact outlines despite the omnipresent crumbling andpitting. With the field-glass we could barely make out what seemed to be sculptural decorationsin horizontal bands—decorations including those curious groups of dots whose presenceon the ancient soapstones now assumed a vastly larger significance.

In many places the buildings were totally ruined and the ice-sheet deeply rivenfrom various geologic causes. In other places the stonework was worn down to the very levelof the glaciation. One broad swath, extending from the plateau’s interior to a cleft inthe foothills about a mile to the left of the pass we had traversed, was wholly free from buildings;and probably represented, we concluded, the course of some great river which in Tertiary times—millionsof years ago—had poured through the city and into some prodigious subterranean abyss ofthe great barrier range. Certainly, this was above all a region of caves, gulfs, and undergroundsecrets beyond human penetration.

Looking back to our sensations, and recalling our dazedness at viewing thismonstrous survival from aeons we had thought pre-human, I can only wonder that we preservedthe semblance of equilibrium which we did. Of course we knew that something—chronology,scientific theory, or our own consciousness—was woefully awry; yet we kept enough poiseto guide the plane, observe many things quite minutely, and take a careful series of photographswhich may yet serve both us and the world in good stead. In my case, ingrained scientific habitmay have helped; for above all my bewilderment and sense of menace there burned a dominant curiosityto fathom more of this age-old secret—to know what sort of beings had built and livedin this incalculably gigantic place, and what relation to the general world of its time or ofother times so unique a concentration of life could have had.

For this place could be no ordinary city. It must have formed the primary nucleusand centre of some archaic and unbelievable chapter of earth’s history whose outward ramifications,recalled only dimly in the most obscure and distorted myths, had vanished utterly amidst thechaos of terrene convulsions long before any human race we know had shambled out of apedom.Here sprawled a palaeogean megalopolis compared with which the fabled Atlantis and Lemuria,Commoriom and Uzuldaroum, and Olathoë in the land of Lomar are recent things of today—noteven of yesterday; a megalopolis ranking with such whispered pre-human blasphemies as Valusia,R’lyeh, Ib in the land of Mnar, and the Nameless City of Arabia Deserta. As we flew abovethat tangle of stark titan towers my imagination sometimes escaped all bounds and roved aimlesslyin realms of fantastic associations—even weaving links betwixt this lost world and someof my own wildest dreams concerning the mad horror at the camp.

The plane’s fuel-tank, in the interest of greater lightness, had beenonly partly filled; hence we now had to exert caution in our explorations. Even so, however,we covered an enormous extent of ground—or rather, air—after swooping down to alevel where the wind became virtually negligible. There seemed to be no limit to the mountain-range,or to the length of the frightful stone city which bordered its inner foothills. Fifty milesof flight in each direction shewed no major change in the labyrinth of rock and masonry thatclawed up corpse-like through the eternal ice. There were, though, some highly absorbing diversifications;such as the carvings on the canyon where that broad river had once pierced the foothills andapproached its sinking-place in the great range. The headlands at the stream’s entrancehad been boldly carved into Cyclopean pylons; and something about the ridgy, barrel-shaped designsstirred up oddly vague, hateful, and confusing semi-remembrances in both Danforth and me.

We also came upon several star-shaped open spaces, evidently public squares;and noted various undulations in the terrain. Where a sharp hill rose, it was generally hollowedout into some sort of rambling stone edifice; but there were at least two exceptions. Of theselatter, one was too badly weathered to disclose what had been on the jutting eminence, whilethe other still bore a fantastic conical monument carved out of the solid rock and roughly resemblingsuch things as the well-known Snake Tomb in the ancient valley of Petra.

Flying inland from the mountains, we discovered that the city was not of infinitewidth, even though its length along the foothills seemed endless. After about thirty miles thegrotesque stone buildings began to thin out, and in ten more miles we came to an unbroken wastevirtually without signs of sentient artifice. The course of the river beyond the city seemedmarked by a broad depressed line; while the land assumed a somewhat greater ruggedness, seemingto slope slightly upward as it receded in the mist-hazed west.

So far we had made no landing, yet to leave the plateau without an attemptat entering some of the monstrous structures would have been inconceivable. Accordingly we decidedto find a smooth place on the foothills near our navigable pass, there grounding the plane andpreparing to do some exploration on foot. Though these gradual slopes were partly covered witha scattering of ruins, low flying soon disclosed an ample number of possible landing-places.Selecting that nearest to the pass, since our next flight would be across the great range andback to camp, we succeeded about 12:30 P.M. in coming down on a smooth, hard snowfield whollydevoid of obstacles and well adapted to a swift and favourable takeoff later on.

It did not seem necessary to protect the plane with a snow banking for so briefa time and in so comfortable an absence of high winds at this level; hence we merely saw thatthe landing skis were safely lodged, and that the vital parts of the mechanism were guardedagainst the cold. For our foot journey we discarded the heaviest of our flying furs, and tookwith us a small outfit consisting of pocket compass, hand camera, light provisions, voluminousnotebooks and paper, geologist’s hammer and chisel, specimen-bags, coil of climbing rope,and powerful electric torches with extra batteries; this equipment having been carried in theplane on the chance that we might be able to effect a landing, take ground pictures, make drawingsand topographical sketches, and obtain rock specimens from some bare slope, outcropping, ormountain cave. Fortunately we had a supply of extra paper to tear up, place in a spare specimen-bag,and use on the ancient principle of hare-and-hounds for marking our course in any interior mazeswe might be able to penetrate. This had been brought in case we found some cave system withair quiet enough to allow such a rapid and easy method in place of the usual rock-chipping methodof trail-blazing.

Walking cautiously downhill over the crusted snow toward the stupendous stonelabyrinth that loomed against the opalescent west, we felt almost as keen a sense of imminentmarvels as we had felt on approaching the unfathomed mountain pass four hours previously. True,we had become visually familiar with the incredible secret concealed by the barrier peaks; yetthe prospect of actually entering primordial walls reared by conscious beings perhaps millionsof years ago—before any known race of men could have existed—was none the less awesomeand potentially terrible in its implications of cosmic abnormality. Though the thinness of theair at this prodigious altitude made exertion somewhat more difficult than usual; both Danforthand I found ourselves bearing up very well, and felt equal to almost any task which might fallto our lot. It took only a few steps to bring us to a shapeless ruin worn level with the snow,while ten or fifteen rods farther on there was a huge roofless rampart still complete in itsgigantic five-pointed outline and rising to an irregular height of ten or eleven feet. For thislatter we headed; and when at last we were able actually to touch its weathered Cyclopean blocks,we felt that we had established an unprecedented and almost blasphemous link with forgottenaeons normally closed to our species.

This rampart, shaped like a star and perhaps 300 feet from point to point,was built of Jurassic sandstone blocks of irregular size, averaging 6 × 8 feet in surface.There was a row of arched loopholes or windows about four feet wide and five feet high; spacedquite symmetrically along the points of the star and at its inner angles, and with the bottomsabout four feet from the glaciated surface. Looking through these, we could see that the masonrywas fully five feet thick, that there were no partitions remaining within, and that there weretraces of banded carvings or bas-reliefs on the interior walls; facts we had indeed guessedbefore, when flying low over this rampart and others like it. Though lower parts must have originallyexisted, all traces of such things were now wholly obscured by the deep layer of ice and snowat this point.

We crawled through one of the windows and vainly tried to decipher the nearlyeffaced mural designs, but did not attempt to disturb the glaciated floor. Our orientation flightshad indicated that many buildings in the city proper were less ice-choked, and that we mightperhaps find wholly clear interiors leading down to the true ground level if we entered thosestructures still roofed at the top. Before we left the rampart we photographed it carefully,and studied its mortarless Cyclopean masonry with complete bewilderment. We wished that Pabodiewere present, for his engineering knowledge might have helped us guess how such titanic blockscould have been handled in that unbelievably remote age when the city and its outskirts werebuilt up.

The half-mile walk downhill to the actual city, with the upper wind shriekingvainly and savagely through the skyward peaks in the background, was something whose smallestdetails will always remain engraved on my mind. Only in fantastic nightmares could any humanbeings but Danforth and me conceive such optical effects. Between us and the churning vapoursof the west lay that monstrous tangle of dark stone towers; its outré and incredible forms impressingus afresh at every new angle of vision. It was a mirage in solid stone, and were it not forthe photographs I would still doubt that such a thing could be. The general type of masonrywas identical with that of the rampart we had examined; but the extravagant shapes which thismasonry took in its urban manifestations were past all description.

Even the pictures illustrate only one or two phases of its infinite bizarrerie,endless variety, preternatural massiveness, and utterly alien exoticism. There were geometricalforms for which an Euclid could scarcely find a name—cones of all degrees of irregularityand truncation; terraces of every sort of provocative disproportion; shafts with odd bulbousenlargements; broken columns in curious groups; and five-pointed or five-ridged arrangementsof mad grotesqueness. As we drew nearer we could see beneath certain transparent parts of theice-sheet, and detect some of the tubular stone bridges that connected the crazily sprinkledstructures at various heights. Of orderly streets there seemed to be none, the only broad openswath being a mile to the left, where the ancient river had doubtless flowed through the towninto the mountains.

Our field-glasses shewed the external horizontal bands of nearly effaced sculpturesand dot-groups to be very prevalent, and we could half imagine what the city must once havelooked like—even though most of the roofs and tower-tops had necessarily perished. Asa whole, it had been a complex tangle of twisted lanes and alleys; all of them deep canyons,and some little better than tunnels because of the overhanging masonry or overarching bridges.Now, outspread below us, it loomed like a dream-phantasy against a westward mist through whosenorthern end the low, reddish antarctic sun of early afternoon was struggling to shine; andwhen for a moment that sun encountered a denser obstruction and plunged the scene into temporaryshadow, the effect was subtly menacing in a way I can never hope to depict. Even the faint howlingand piping of the unfelt wind in the great mountain passes behind us took on a wilder note ofpurposeful malignity. The last stage of our descent to the town was unusually steep and abrupt,and a rock outcropping at the edge where the grade changed led us to think that an artificialterrace had once existed there. Under the glaciation, we believed, there must be a flight ofsteps or its equivalent.

When at last we plunged into the labyrinthine town itself, clambering overfallen masonry and shrinking from the oppressive nearness and dwarfing height of omnipresentcrumbling and pitted walls, our sensations again became such that I marvel at the amount ofself-control we retained. Danforth was frankly jumpy, and began making some offensively irrelevantspeculations about the horror at the camp—which I resented all the more because I couldnot help sharing certain conclusions forced upon us by many features of this morbid survivalfrom nightmare antiquity. The speculations worked on his imagination, too; for in one place—wherea debris-littered alley turned a sharp corner—he insisted that he saw faint traces ofground markings which he did not like; whilst elsewhere he stopped to listen to a subtle imaginarysound from some undefined point—a muffled musical piping, he said, not unlike that ofthe wind in the mountain caves yet somehow disturbingly different. The ceaseless five-pointednessof the surrounding architecture and of the few distinguishable mural arabesques had a dimlysinister suggestiveness we could not escape; and gave us a touch of terrible subconscious certaintyconcerning the primal entities which had reared and dwelt in this unhallowed place.

Nevertheless our scientific and adventurous souls were not wholly dead; andwe mechanically carried out our programme of chipping specimens from all the different rocktypes represented in the masonry. We wished a rather full set in order to draw better conclusionsregarding the age of the place. Nothing in the great outer walls seemed to date from later thanthe Jurassic and Comanchian periods, nor was any piece of stone in the entire place of a greaterrecency than the Pliocene age. In stark certainty, we were wandering amidst a death which hadreigned at least 500,000 years, and in all probability even longer.

As we proceeded through this maze of stone-shadowed twilight we stopped atall available apertures to study interiors and investigate entrance possibilities. Some wereabove our reach, whilst others led only into ice-choked ruins as unroofed and barren as therampart on the hill. One, though spacious and inviting, opened on a seemingly bottomless abysswithout visible means of descent. Now and then we had a chance to study the petrified wood ofa surviving shutter, and were impressed by the fabulous antiquity implied in the still discerniblegrain. These things had come from Mesozoic gymnosperms and conifers—especially Cretaceouscycads—and from fan-palms and early angiosperms of plainly Tertiary date. Nothing definitelylater than the Pliocene could be discovered. In the placing of these shutters—whose edgesshewed the former presence of queer and long-vanished hinges—usage seemed to be varied;some being on the outer and some on the inner side of the deep embrasures. They seemed to havebecome wedged in place, thus surviving the rusting of their former and probably metallic fixturesand fastenings.

After a time we came across a row of windows—in the bulges of a colossalfive-ridged cone of undamaged apex—which led into a vast, well-preserved room with stoneflooring; but these were too high in the room to permit of descent without a rope. We had arope with us, but did not wish to bother with this twenty-foot drop unless obliged to—especiallyin this thin plateau air where great demands were made upon the heart action. This enormousroom was probably a hall or concourse of some sort, and our electric torches shewed bold, distinct,and potentially startling sculptures arranged round the walls in broad, horizontal bands separatedby equally broad strips of conventional arabesques. We took careful note of this spot, planningto enter here unless a more easily gained interior were encountered.

Finally, though, we did encounter exactly the opening we wished; an archwayabout six feet wide and ten feet high, marking the former end of an aërial bridge whichhad spanned an alley about five feet above the present level of glaciation. These archways,of course, were flush with upper-story floors; and in this case one of the floors still existed.The building thus accessible was a series of rectangular terraces on our left facing westward.That across the alley, where the other archway yawned, was a decrepit cylinder with no windowsand with a curious bulge about ten feet above the aperture. It was totally dark inside, andthe archway seemed to open on a well of illimitable emptiness.

Heaped debris made the entrance to the vast left-hand building doubly easy,yet for a moment we hesitated before taking advantage of the long-wished chance. For thoughwe had penetrated into this tangle of archaic mystery, it required fresh resolution to carryus actually inside a complete and surviving building of a fabulous elder world whose naturewas becoming more and more hideously plain to us. In the end, however, we made the plunge; andscrambled up over the rubble into the gaping embrasure. The floor beyond was of great slateslabs, and seemed to form the outlet of a long, high corridor with sculptured walls.

Observing the many inner archways which led off from it, and realising theprobable complexity of the nest of apartments within, we decided that we must begin our systemof hare-and-hound trail-blazing. Hitherto our compasses, together with frequent glimpses ofthe vast mountain-range between the towers in our rear, had been enough to prevent our losingour way; but from now on, the artificial substitute would be necessary. Accordingly we reducedour extra paper to shreds of suitable size, placed these in a bag to be carried by Danforth,and prepared to use them as economically as safety would allow. This method would probably gainus immunity from straying, since there did not appear to be any strong air-currents inside theprimordial masonry. If such should develop, or if our paper supply should give out, we couldof course fall back on the more secure though more tedious and retarding method of rock-chipping.

Just how extensive a territory we had opened up, it was impossible to guesswithout a trial. The close and frequent connexion of the different buildings made it likelythat we might cross from one to another on bridges underneath the ice except where impeded bylocal collapses and geologic rifts, for very little glaciation seemed to have entered the massiveconstructions. Almost all the areas of transparent ice had revealed the submerged windows astightly shuttered, as if the town had been left in that uniform state until the glacial sheetcame to crystallise the lower part for all succeeding time. Indeed, one gained a curious impressionthat this place had been deliberately closed and deserted in some dim, bygone aeon, rather thanoverwhelmed by any sudden calamity or even gradual decay. Had the coming of the ice been foreseen,and had a nameless population left en masse to seek a less doomed abode? The precise physiographicconditions attending the formation of the ice-sheet at this point would have to wait for latersolution. It had not, very plainly, been a grinding drive. Perhaps the pressure of accumulatedsnows had been responsible; and perhaps some flood from the river, or from the bursting of someancient glacial dam in the great range, had helped to create the special state now observable.Imagination could conceive almost anything in connexion with this place.

VI.

It would be cumbrous to give a detailed, consecutive account of our wanderings inside that cavernous,aeon-dead honeycomb of primal masonry; that monstrous lair of elder secrets which now echoedfor the first time, after uncounted epochs, to the tread of human feet. This is especially truebecause so much of the horrible drama and revelation came from a mere study of the omnipresentmural carvings. Our flashlight photographs of those carvings will do much toward proving thetruth of what we are now disclosing, and it is lamentable that we had not a larger film supplywith us. As it was, we made crude notebook sketches of certain salient features after all ourfilms were used up.

The building which we had entered was one of great size and elaborateness,and gave us an impressive notion of the architecture of that nameless geologic past. The innerpartitions were less massive than the outer walls, but on the lower levels were excellentlypreserved. Labyrinthine complexity, involving curiously irregular differences in floor levels,characterised the entire arrangement; and we should certainly have been lost at the very outsetbut for the trail of torn paper left behind us. We decided to explore the more decrepit upperparts first of all, hence climbed aloft in the maze for a distance of some 100 feet, to wherethe topmost tier of chambers yawned snowily and ruinously open to the polar sky. Ascent waseffected over the steep, transversely ribbed stone ramps or inclined planes which everywhereserved in lieu of stairs. The rooms we encountered were of all imaginable shapes and proportions,ranging from five-pointed stars to triangles and perfect cubes. It might be safe to say thattheir general average was about 30 × 30 feet in floor area, and 20 feet in height; thoughmany larger apartments existed. After thoroughly examining the upper regions and the glaciallevel we descended story by story into the submerged part, where indeed we soon saw we werein a continuous maze of connected chambers and passages probably leading over unlimited areasoutside this particular building. The Cyclopean massiveness and giganticism of everything aboutus became curiously oppressive; and there was something vaguely but deeply unhuman in all thecontours, dimensions, proportions, decorations, and constructional nuances of the blasphemouslyarchaic stonework. We soon realised from what the carvings revealed that this monstrous citywas many million years old.

We cannot yet explain the engineering principles used in the anomalous balancingand adjustment of the vast rock masses, though the function of the arch was clearly much reliedon. The rooms we visited were wholly bare of all portable contents, a circumstance which sustainedour belief in the city’s deliberate desertion. The prime decorative feature was the almostuniversal system of mural sculpture; which tended to run in continuous horizontal bands threefeet wide and arranged from floor to ceiling in alternation with bands of equal width givenover to geometrical arabesques. There were exceptions to this rule of arrangement, but its preponderancewas overwhelming. Often, however, a series of smooth cartouches containing oddly patterned groupsof dots would be sunk along one of the arabesque bands.

The technique, we soon saw, was mature, accomplished, and aesthetically evolvedto the highest degree of civilised mastery; though utterly alien in every detail to any knownart tradition of the human race. In delicacy of execution no sculpture I have ever seen couldapproach it. The minutest details of elaborate vegetation, or of animal life, were renderedwith astonishing vividness despite the bold scale of the carvings; whilst the conventional designswere marvels of skilful intricacy. The arabesques displayed a profound use of mathematical principles,and were made up of obscurely symmetrical curves and angles based on the quantity of five. Thepictorial bands followed a highly formalised tradition, and involved a peculiar treatment ofperspective; but had an artistic force that moved us profoundly notwithstanding the interveninggulf of vast geologic periods. Their method of design hinged on a singular juxtaposition ofthe cross-section with the two-dimensional silhouette, and embodied an analytical psychologybeyond that of any known race of antiquity. It is useless to try to compare this art with anyrepresented in our museums. Those who see our photographs will probably find its closest analoguein certain grotesque conceptions of the most daring futurists.

The arabesque tracery consisted altogether of depressed lines whose depth onunweathered walls varied from one to two inches. When cartouches with dot-groups appeared—evidentlyas inscriptions in some unknown and primordial language and alphabet—the depression ofthe smooth surface was perhaps an inch and a half, and of the dots perhaps a half-inch more.The pictorial bands were in counter-sunk low relief, their background being depressed abouttwo inches from the original wall surface. In some specimens marks of a former colouration couldbe detected, though for the most part the untold aeons had disintegrated and banished any pigmentswhich may have been applied. The more one studied the marvellous technique the more one admiredthe things. Beneath their strict conventionalisation one could grasp the minute and accurateobservation and graphic skill of the artists; and indeed, the very conventions themselves servedto symbolise and accentuate the real essence or vital differentiation of every object delineated.We felt, too, that besides these recognisable excellences there were others lurking beyond thereach of our perceptions. Certain touches here and there gave vague hints of latent symbolsand stimuli which another mental and emotional background, and a fuller or different sensoryequipment, might have made of profound and poignant significance to us.

The subject-matter of the sculptures obviously came from the life of the vanishedepoch of their creation, and contained a large proportion of evident history. It is this abnormalhistoric-mindedness of the primal race—a chance circumstance operating, through coincidence,miraculously in our favour—which made the carvings so awesomely informative to us, andwhich caused us to place their photography and transcription above all other considerations.In certain rooms the dominant arrangement was varied by the presence of maps, astronomical charts,and other scientific designs on an enlarged scale—these things giving a naive and terriblecorroboration to what we gathered from the pictorial friezes and dadoes. In hinting at whatthe whole revealed, I can only hope that my account will not arouse a curiosity greater thansane caution on the part of those who believe me at all. It would be tragic if any were to beallured to that realm of death and horror by the very warning meant to discourage them.

Interrupting these sculptured walls were high windows and massive twelve-footdoorways; both now and then retaining the petrified wooden planks—elaborately carved andpolished—of the actual shutters and doors. All metal fixtures had long ago vanished, butsome of the doors remained in place and had to be forced aside as we progressed from room toroom. Window-frames with odd transparent panes—mostly elliptical—survived here andthere, though in no considerable quantity. There were also frequent niches of great magnitude,generally empty, but once in a while containing some bizarre object carved from green soapstonewhich was either broken or perhaps held too inferior to warrant removal. Other apertures wereundoubtedly connected with bygone mechanical facilities—heating, lighting, and the like—ofa sort suggested in many of the carvings. Ceilings tended to be plain, but had sometimes beeninlaid with green soapstone or other tiles, mostly fallen now. Floors were also paved with suchtiles, though plain stonework predominated.

As I have said, all furniture and other moveables were absent; but the sculpturesgave a clear idea of the strange devices which had once filled these tomb-like, echoing rooms.Above the glacial sheet the floors were generally thick with detritus, litter, and debris; butfarther down this condition decreased. In some of the lower chambers and corridors there waslittle more than gritty dust or ancient incrustations, while occasional areas had an uncannyair of newly swept immaculateness. Of course, where rifts or collapses had occurred, the lowerlevels were as littered as the upper ones. A central court—as in other structures we hadseen from the air—saved the inner regions from total darkness; so that we seldom had touse our electric torches in the upper rooms except when studying sculptured details. Below theice-cap, however, the twilight deepened; and in many parts of the tangled ground level therewas an approach to absolute blackness.

To form even a rudimentary idea of our thoughts and feelings as we penetratedthis aeon-silent maze of unhuman masonry one must correlate a hopelessly bewildering chaos offugitive moods, memories, and impressions. The sheer appalling antiquity and lethal desolationof the place were enough to overwhelm almost any sensitive person, but added to these elementswere the recent unexplained horror at the camp, and the revelations all too soon effected bythe terrible mural sculptures around us. The moment we came upon a perfect section of carving,where no ambiguity of interpretation could exist, it took only a brief study to give us thehideous truth—a truth which it would be naive to claim Danforth and I had not independentlysuspected before, though we had carefully refrained from even hinting it to each other. Therecould now be no further merciful doubt about the nature of the beings which had built and inhabitedthis monstrous dead city millions of years ago, when man’s ancestors were primitive archaicmammals, and vast dinosaurs roamed the tropical steppes of Europe and Asia.

We had previously clung to a desperate alternative and insisted—eachto himself—that the omnipresence of the five-pointed motif meant only some cultural orreligious exaltation of the Archaean natural object which had so patently embodied the qualityof five-pointedness; as the decorative motifs of Minoan Crete exalted the sacred bull, thoseof Egypt the scarabaeus, those of Rome the wolf and the eagle, and those of various savage tribessome chosen totem-animal. But this lone refuge was now stripped from us, and we were forcedto face definitely the reason-shaking realisation which the reader of these pages has doubtlesslong ago anticipated. I can scarcely bear to write it down in black and white even now, butperhaps that will not be necessary. 

The things once rearing and dwelling in this frightful masonry in the age ofdinosaurs were not indeed dinosaurs, but far worse. Mere dinosaurs were new and almost brainlessobjects—but the builders of the city were wise and old, and had left certain traces inrocks even then laid down well-nigh a thousand million years&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. rocks laiddown before the true life of earth had advanced beyond plastic groups of cells&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.rocks laid down before the true life of earth had existed at all. They were the makers and enslaversof that life, and above all doubt the originals of the fiendish elder myths which things likethe Pnakotic Manuscripts and the Necronomicon affrightedly hint about. They were theGreat Old Ones that had filtered down from the stars when earth was young—the beings whosesubstance an alien evolution had shaped, and whose powers were such as this planet had neverbred. And to think that only the day before Danforth and I had actually looked upon fragmentsof their millennially fossilised substance&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and that poor Lake and his partyhad seen their complete outlines.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

It is of course impossible for me to relate in proper order the stages by whichwe picked up what we know of that monstrous chapter of pre-human life. After the first shockof the certain revelation we had to pause a while to recuperate, and it was fully three o’clockbefore we got started on our actual tour of systematic research. The sculptures in the buildingwe entered were of relatively late date—perhaps two million years ago—as checkedup by geological, biological, and astronomical features; and embodied an art which would becalled decadent in comparison with that of specimens we found in older buildings after crossingbridges under the glacial sheet. One edifice hewn from the solid rock seemed to go back fortyor possibly even fifty million years—to the lower Eocene or upper Cretaceous—andcontained bas-reliefs of an artistry surpassing anything else, with one tremendous exception,that we encountered. That was, we have since agreed, the oldest domestic structure we traversed.

Were it not for the support of those flashlights soon to be made public, Iwould refrain from telling what I found and inferred, lest I be confined as a madman. Of course,the infinitely early parts of the patchwork tale—representing the pre-terrestrial lifeof the star-headed beings on other planets, and in other galaxies, and in other universes—canreadily be interpreted as the fantastic mythology of those beings themselves; yet such partssometimes involved designs and diagrams so uncannily close to the latest findings of mathematicsand astrophysics that I scarcely know what to think. Let others judge when they see the photographsI shall publish.

Naturally, no one set of carvings which we encountered told more than a fractionof any connected story; nor did we even begin to come upon the various stages of that storyin their proper order. Some of the vast rooms were independent units so far as their designswere concerned, whilst in other cases a continuous chronicle would be carried through a seriesof rooms and corridors. The best of the maps and diagrams were on the walls of a frightful abyssbelow even the ancient ground level—a cavern perhaps 200 feet square and sixty feet high,which had almost undoubtedly been an educational centre of some sort. There were many provokingrepetitions of the same material in different rooms and buildings; since certain chapters ofexperience, and certain summaries or phases of racial history, had evidently been favouriteswith different decorators or dwellers. Sometimes, though, variant versions of the same themeproved useful in settling debatable points and filling in gaps.

I still wonder that we deduced so much in the short time at our disposal. Ofcourse, we even now have only the barest outline; and much of that was obtained later on froma study of the photographs and sketches we made. It may be the effect of this later study—therevived memories and vague impressions acting in conjunction with his general sensitivenessand with that final supposed horror-glimpse whose essence he will not reveal even to me—whichhas been the immediate source of Danforth’s present breakdown. But it had to be; for wecould not issue our warning intelligently without the fullest possible information, and theissuance of that warning is a prime necessity. Certain lingering influences in that unknownantarctic world of disordered time and alien natural law make it imperative that further explorationbe discouraged.

VII.

The full story, so far as deciphered, will shortly appear in an official bulletin of MiskatonicUniversity. Here I shall sketch only the salient high lights in a formless, rambling way. Mythor otherwise, the sculptures told of the coming of those star-headed things to the nascent,lifeless earth out of cosmic space—their coming, and the coming of many other alien entitiessuch as at certain times embark upon spatial pioneering. They seemed able to traverse the interstellarether on their vast membraneous wings—thus oddly confirming some curious hill folklorelong ago told me by an antiquarian colleague. They had lived under the sea a good deal, buildingfantastic cities and fighting terrific battles with nameless adversaries by means of intricatedevices employing unknown principles of energy. Evidently their scientific and mechanical knowledgefar surpassed man’s today, though they made use of its more widespread and elaborate formsonly when obliged to. Some of the sculptures suggested that they had passed through a stageof mechanised life on other planets, but had receded upon finding its effects emotionally unsatisfying.Their preternatural toughness of organisation and simplicity of natural wants made them peculiarlyable to live on a high plane without the more specialised fruits of artificial manufacture,and even without garments except for occasional protection against the elements.

It was under the sea, at first for food and later for other purposes, thatthey first created earth-life—using available substances according to long-known methods.The more elaborate experiments came after the annihilation of various cosmic enemies. They haddone the same thing on other planets; having manufactured not only necessary foods, but certainmulticellular protoplasmic masses capable of moulding their tissues into all sorts of temporaryorgans under hypnotic influence and thereby forming ideal slaves to perform the heavy work ofthe community. These viscous masses were without doubt what Abdul Alhazred whispered about asthe “shoggoths” in his frightful Necronomicon, though even that mad Arabhad not hinted that any existed on earth except in the dreams of those who had chewed a certainalkaloidal herb. When the star-headed Old Ones on this planet had synthesised their simple foodforms and bred a good supply of shoggoths, they allowed other cell-groups to develop into otherforms of animal and vegetable life for sundry purposes; extirpating any whose presence becametroublesome.

With the aid of the shoggoths, whose expansions could be made to lift prodigiousweights, the small, low cities under the sea grew to vast and imposing labyrinths of stone notunlike those which later rose on land. Indeed, the highly adaptable Old Ones had lived muchon land in other parts of the universe, and probably retained many traditions of land construction.As we studied the architecture of all these sculptured palaeogean cities, including that whoseaeon-dead corridors we were even then traversing, we were impressed by a curious coincidencewhich we have not yet tried to explain, even to ourselves. The tops of the buildings, whichin the actual city around us had of course been weathered into shapeless ruins ages ago, wereclearly displayed in the bas-reliefs; and shewed vast clusters of needle-like spires, delicatefinials on certain cone and pyramid apexes, and tiers of thin, horizontal scalloped discs cappingcylindrical shafts. This was exactly what we had seen in that monstrous and portentous mirage,cast by a dead city whence such skyline features had been absent for thousands and tens of thousandsof years, which loomed on our ignorant eyes across the unfathomed mountains of madness as wefirst approached poor Lake’s ill-fated camp.

Of the life of the Old Ones, both under the sea and after part of them migratedto land, volumes could be written. Those in shallow water had continued the fullest use of theeyes at the ends of their five main head tentacles, and had practiced the arts of sculptureand of writing in quite the usual way—the writing accomplished with a stylus on waterproofwaxen surfaces. Those lower down in the ocean depths, though they used a curious phosphorescentorganism to furnish light, pieced out their vision with obscure special senses operating throughthe prismatic cilia on their heads—senses which rendered all the Old Ones partly independentof light in emergencies. Their forms of sculpture and writing had changed curiously during thedescent, embodying certain apparently chemical coating processes—probably to secure phosphorescence—whichthe bas-reliefs could not make clear to us. The beings moved in the sea partly by swimming—usingthe lateral crinoid arms—and partly by wriggling with the lower tier of tentacles containingthe pseudo-feet. Occasionally they accomplished long swoops with the auxiliary use of two ormore sets of their fan-like folding wings. On land they locally used the pseudo-feet, but nowand then flew to great heights or over long distances with their wings. The many slender tentaclesinto which the crinoid arms branched were infinitely delicate, flexible, strong, and accuratein muscular-nervous coördination; ensuring the utmost skill and dexterity in all artisticand other manual operations.

The toughness of the things was almost incredible. Even the terrific pressuresof the deepest sea-bottoms appeared powerless to harm them. Very few seemed to die at all exceptby violence, and their burial-places were very limited. The fact that they covered their verticallyinhumed dead with five-pointed inscribed mounds set up thoughts in Danforth and me which madea fresh pause and recuperation necessary after the sculptures revealed it. The beings multipliedby means of spores—like vegetable pteridophytes as Lake had suspected—but owingto their prodigious toughness and longevity, and consequent lack of replacement needs, theydid not encourage the large-scale development of new prothalli except when they had new regionsto colonise. The young matured swiftly, and received an education evidently beyond any standardwe can imagine. The prevailing intellectual and aesthetic life was highly evolved, and produceda tenaciously enduring set of customs and institutions which I shall describe more fully inmy coming monograph. These varied slightly according to sea or land residence, but had the samefoundations and essentials.

Though able, like vegetables, to derive nourishment from inorganic substances;they vastly preferred organic and especially animal food. They ate uncooked marine life underthe sea, but cooked their viands on land. They hunted game and raised meat herds—slaughteringwith sharp weapons whose odd marks on certain fossil bones our expedition had noted. They resistedall ordinary temperatures marvellously; and in their natural state could live in water downto freezing. When the great chill of the Pleistocene drew on, however—nearly a millionyears ago—the land dwellers had to resort to special measures including artificial heating;until at last the deadly cold appears to have driven them back into the sea. For their prehistoricflights through cosmic space, legend said, they had absorbed certain chemicals and became almostindependent of eating, breathing, or heat conditions; but by the time of the great cold theyhad lost track of the method. In any case they could not have prolonged the artificial stateindefinitely without harm.

Being non-pairing and semi-vegetable in structure, the Old Ones had no biologicalbasis for the family phase of mammal life; but seemed to organise large households on the principlesof comfortable space-utility and—as we deduced from the pictured occupations and diversionsof co-dwellers—congenial mental association. In furnishing their homes they kept everythingin the centre of the huge rooms, leaving all the wall spaces free for decorative treatment.Lighting, in the case of the land inhabitants, was accomplished by a device probably electro-chemicalin nature. Both on land and under water they used curious tables, chairs, and couches like cylindricalframes—for they rested and slept upright with folded-down tentacles—and racks forthe hinged sets of dotted surfaces forming their books.

Government was evidently complex and probably socialistic, though no certaintiesin this regard could be deduced from the sculptures we saw. There was extensive commerce, bothlocal and between different cities; certain small, flat counters, five-pointed and inscribed,serving as money. Probably the smaller of the various greenish soapstones found by our expeditionwere pieces of such currency. Though the culture was mainly urban, some agriculture and muchstock-raising existed. Mining and a limited amount of manufacturing were also practiced. Travelwas very frequent, but permanent migration seemed relatively rare except for the vast colonisingmovements by which the race expanded. For personal locomotion no external aid was used; sincein land, air, and water movement alike the Old Ones seemed to possess excessively vast capacitiesfor speed. Loads, however, were drawn by beasts of burden—shoggoths under the sea, anda curious variety of primitive vertebrates in the later years of land existence.

These vertebrates, as well as an infinity of other life-forms—animaland vegetable, marine, terrestrial, and aërial—were the products of unguided evolutionacting on life-cells made by the Old Ones but escaping beyond their radius of attention. Theyhad been suffered to develop unchecked because they had not come in conflict with the dominantbeings. Bothersome forms, of course, were mechanically exterminated. It interested us to seein some of the very last and most decadent sculptures a shambling primitive mammal, used sometimesfor food and sometimes as an amusing buffoon by the land dwellers, whose vaguely simian andhuman foreshadowings were unmistakable. In the building of land cities the huge stone blocksof the high towers were generally lifted by vast-winged pterodactyls of a species heretoforeunknown to palaeontology.

The persistence with which the Old Ones survived various geologic changes andconvulsions of the earth’s crust was little short of miraculous. Though few or none oftheir first cities seem to have remained beyond the Archaean age, there was no interruptionin their civilisation or in the transmission of their records. Their original place of adventto the planet was the Antarctic Ocean, and it is likely that they came not long after the matterforming the moon was wrenched from the neighbouring South Pacific. According to one of the sculpturedmaps, the whole globe was then under water, with stone cities scattered farther and fartherfrom the antarctic as aeons passed. Another map shews a vast bulk of dry land around the southpole, where it is evident that some of the beings made experimental settlements though theirmain centres were transferred to the nearest sea-bottom. Later maps, which display this landmass as cracking and drifting, and sending certain detached parts northward, uphold in a strikingway the theories of continental drift lately advanced by Taylor, Wegener, and Joly.

With the upheaval of new land in the South Pacific tremendous events began.Some of the marine cities were hopelessly shattered, yet that was not the worst misfortune.Another race—a land race of beings shaped like octopi and probably corresponding to thefabulous pre-human spawn of Cthulhu—soon began filtering down from cosmic infinity andprecipitated a monstrous war which for a time drove the Old Ones wholly back to the sea—acolossal blow in view of the increasing land settlements. Later peace was made, and the newlands were given to the Cthulhu spawn whilst the Old Ones held the sea and the older lands.New land cities were founded—the greatest of them in the antarctic, for this region offirst arrival was sacred. From then on, as before, the antarctic remained the centre of theOld Ones’ civilisation, and all the discoverable cities built there by the Cthulhu spawnwere blotted out. Then suddenly the lands of the Pacific sank again, taking with them the frightfulstone city of R’lyeh and all the cosmic octopi, so that the Old Ones were again supremeon the planet except for one shadowy fear about which they did not like to speak. At a ratherlater age their cities dotted all the land and water areas of the globe—hence the recommendationin my coming monograph that some archaeologist make systematic borings with Pabodie’stype of apparatus in certain widely separated regions.

The steady trend down the ages was from water to land; a movement encouragedby the rise of new land masses, though the ocean was never wholly deserted. Another cause ofthe landward movement was the new difficulty in breeding and managing the shoggoths upon whichsuccessful sea-life depended. With the march of time, as the sculptures sadly confessed, theart of creating new life from inorganic matter had been lost; so that the Old Ones had to dependon the moulding of forms already in existence. On land the great reptiles proved highly tractable;but the shoggoths of the sea, reproducing by fission and acquiring a dangerous degree of accidentalintelligence, presented for a time a formidable problem.

They had always been controlled through the hypnotic suggestion of the OldOnes, and had modelled their tough plasticity into various useful temporary limbs and organs;but now their self-modelling powers were sometimes exercised independently, and in various imitativeforms implanted by past suggestion. They had, it seems, developed a semi-stable brain whoseseparate and occasionally stubborn volition echoed the will of the Old Ones without always obeyingit. Sculptured images of these shoggoths filled Danforth and me with horror and loathing. Theywere normally shapeless entities composed of a viscous jelly which looked like an agglutinationof bubbles; and each averaged about fifteen feet in diameter when a sphere. They had, however,a constantly shifting shape and volume; throwing out temporary developments or forming apparentorgans of sight, hearing, and speech in imitation of their masters, either spontaneously oraccording to suggestion.

They seem to have become peculiarly intractable toward the middle of the Permianage, perhaps 150 million years ago, when a veritable war of re-subjugation was waged upon themby the marine Old Ones. Pictures of this war, and of the headless, slime-coated fashion in whichthe shoggoths typically left their slain victims, held a marvellously fearsome quality despitethe intervening abyss of untold ages. The Old Ones had used curious weapons of molecular disturbanceagainst the rebel entities, and in the end had achieved a complete victory. Thereafter the sculpturesshewed a period in which shoggoths were tamed and broken by armed Old Ones as the wild horsesof the American west were tamed by cowboys. Though during the rebellion the shoggoths had shewnan ability to live out of water, this transition was not encouraged; since their usefulnesson land would hardly have been commensurate with the trouble of their management.

During the Jurassic age the Old Ones met fresh adversity in the form of a newinvasion from outer space—this time by half-fungous, half-crustacean creatures from aplanet identifiable as the remote and recently discovered Pluto; creatures undoubtedly the sameas those figuring in certain whispered hill legends of the north, and remembered in the Himalayasas the Mi-Go, or Abominable Snow-Men. To fight these beings the Old Ones attempted, for thefirst time since their terrene advent, to sally forth again into the planetary ether; but despiteall traditional preparations found it no longer possible to leave the earth’s atmosphere.Whatever the old secret of interstellar travel had been, it was now definitely lost to the race.In the end the Mi-Go drove the Old Ones out of all the northern lands, though they were powerlessto disturb those in the sea. Little by little the slow retreat of the elder race to their originalantarctic habitat was beginning.

It was curious to note from the pictured battles that both the Cthulhu spawnand the Mi-Go seem to have been composed of matter more widely different from that which weknow than was the substance of the Old Ones. They were able to undergo transformations and reintegrationsimpossible for their adversaries, and seem therefore to have originally come from even remotergulfs of cosmic space. The Old Ones, but for their abnormal toughness and peculiar vital properties,were strictly material, and must have had their absolute origin within the known space-timecontinuum; whereas the first sources of the other beings can only be guessed at with bated breath.All this, of course, assuming that the non-terrestrial linkages and the anomalies ascribed tothe invading foes are not pure mythology. Conceivably, the Old Ones might have invented a cosmicframework to account for their occasional defeats; since historical interest and pride obviouslyformed their chief psychological element. It is significant that their annals failed to mentionmany advanced and potent races of beings whose mighty cultures and towering cities figure persistentlyin certain obscure legends.

The changing state of the world through long geologic ages appeared with startlingvividness in many of the sculptured maps and scenes. In certain cases existing science willrequire revision, while in other cases its bold deductions are magnificently confirmed. As Ihave said, the hypothesis of Taylor, Wegener, and Joly that all the continents are fragmentsof an original antarctic land mass which cracked from centrifugal force and drifted apart overa technically viscous lower surface—an hypothesis suggested by such things as the complementaryoutlines of Africa and South America, and the way the great mountain chains are rolled and shovedup—receives striking support from this uncanny source.

Maps evidently shewing the Carboniferous world of an hundred million or moreyears ago displayed significant rifts and chasms destined later to separate Africa from theonce continuous realms of Europe (then the Valusia of hellish primal legend), Asia, the Americas,and the antarctic continent. Other charts—and most significantly one in connexion withthe founding fifty million years ago of the vast dead city around us—shewed all the presentcontinents well differentiated. And in the latest discoverable specimen—dating perhapsfrom the Pliocene age—the approximate world of today appeared quite clearly despite thelinkage of Alaska with Siberia, of North America with Europe through Greenland, and of SouthAmerica with the antarctic continent through Graham Land. In the Carboniferous map the wholeglobe—ocean floor and rifted land mass alike—bore symbols of the Old Ones’vast stone cities, but in the later charts the gradual recession toward the antarctic becamevery plain. The final Pliocene specimen shewed no land cities except on the antarctic continentand the tip of South America, nor any ocean cities north of the fiftieth parallel of South Latitude.Knowledge and interest in the northern world, save for a study of coast-lines probably madeduring long exploration flights on those fan-like membraneous wings, had evidently declinedto zero among the Old Ones.

Destruction of cities through the upthrust of mountains, the centrifugal rendingof continents, the seismic convulsions of land or sea-bottom, and other natural causes was amatter of common record; and it was curious to observe how fewer and fewer replacements weremade as the ages wore on. The vast dead megalopolis that yawned around us seemed to be the lastgeneral centre of the race; built early in the Cretaceous age after a titanic earth-bucklinghad obliterated a still vaster predecessor not far distant. It appeared that this general regionwas the most sacred spot of all, where reputedly the first Old Ones had settled on a primalsea-bottom. In the new city—many of whose features we could recognise in the sculptures,but which stretched fully an hundred miles along the mountain-range in each direction beyondthe farthest limits of our aërial survey—there were reputed to be preserved certainsacred stones forming part of the first sea-bottom city, which were thrust up to light afterlong epochs in the course of the general crumpling of strata.

VIII.

Naturally, Danforth and I studied with especial interest and a peculiarly personal sense ofawe everything pertaining to the immediate district in which we were. Of this local materialthere was naturally a vast abundance; and on the tangled ground level of the city we were luckyenough to find a house of very late date whose walls, though somewhat damaged by a neighbouringrift, contained sculptures of decadent workmanship carrying the story of the region much beyondthe period of the Pliocene map whence we derived our last general glimpse of the pre-human world.This was the last place we examined in detail, since what we found there gave us a fresh immediateobjective.

Certainly, we were in one of the strangest, weirdest, and most terrible ofall the corners of earth’s globe. Of all existing lands it was infinitely the most ancient;and the conviction grew upon us that this hideous upland must indeed be the fabled nightmareplateau of Leng which even the mad author of the Necronomicon was reluctant to discuss.The great mountain chain was tremendously long—starting as a low range at Luitpold Landon the coast of Weddell Sea and virtually crossing the entire continent. The really high partstretched in a mighty arc from about Latitude 82°, E. Longitude 60° to Latitude 70°,E. Longitude 115°, with its concave side toward our camp and its seaward end in the regionof that long, ice-locked coast whose hills were glimpsed by Wilkes and Mawson at the AntarcticCircle.

Yet even more monstrous exaggerations of Nature seemed disturbingly close athand. I have said that these peaks are higher than the Himalayas, but the sculptures forbidme to say that they are earth’s highest. That grim honour is beyond doubt reserved forsomething which half the sculptures hesitated to record at all, whilst others approached itwith obvious repugnance and trepidation. It seems that there was one part of the ancient land—thefirst part that ever rose from the waters after the earth had flung off the moon and the OldOnes had seeped down from the stars—which had come to be shunned as vaguely and namelesslyevil. Cities built there had crumbled before their time, and had been found suddenly deserted.Then when the first great earth-buckling had convulsed the region in the Comanchian age, a frightfulline of peaks had shot suddenly up amidst the most appalling din and chaos—and earth hadreceived her loftiest and most terrible mountains.

If the scale of the carvings was correct, these abhorred things must have beenmuch over 40,000 feet high—radically vaster than even the shocking mountains of madnesswe had crossed. They extended, it appeared, from about Latitude 77°, E. Longitude 70°to Latitude 70°, E. Longitude 100°—less than 300 miles away from the dead city,so that we would have spied their dreaded summits in the dim western distance had it not beenfor that vague opalescent haze. Their northern end must likewise be visible from the long AntarcticCircle coast-line at Queen Mary Land.

Some of the Old Ones, in the decadent days, had made strange prayers to thosemountains; but none ever went near them or dared to guess what lay beyond. No human eye hadever seen them, and as I studied the emotions conveyed in the carvings I prayed that none evermight. There are protecting hills along the coast beyond them—Queen Mary and Kaiser WilhelmLands—and I thank heaven no one has been able to land and climb those hills. I am notas sceptical about old tales and fears as I used to be, and I do not laugh now at the pre-humansculptor’s notion that lightning paused meaningfully now and then at each of the broodingcrests, and that an unexplained glow shone from one of those terrible pinnacles all throughthe long polar night. There may be a very real and very monstrous meaning in the old Pnakoticwhispers about Kadath in the Cold Waste.

But the terrain close at hand was hardly less strange, even if less namelesslyaccursed. Soon after the founding of the city the great mountain-range became the seat of theprincipal temples, and many carvings shewed what grotesque and fantastic towers had piercedthe sky where now we saw only the curiously clinging cubes and ramparts. In the course of agesthe caves had appeared, and had been shaped into adjuncts of the temples. With the advance ofstill later epochs all the limestone veins of the region were hollowed out by ground waters,so that the mountains, the foothills, and the plains below them were a veritable network ofconnected caverns and galleries. Many graphic sculptures told of explorations deep underground,and of the final discovery of the Stygian sunless sea that lurked at earth’s bowels.

This vast nighted gulf had undoubtedly been worn by the great river which floweddown from the nameless and horrible westward mountains, and which had formerly turned at thebase of the Old Ones’ range and flowed beside that chain into the Indian Ocean betweenBudd and Totten Lands on Wilkes’s coast-line. Little by little it had eaten away the limestonehill base at its turning, till at last its sapping currents reached the caverns of the groundwaters and joined with them in digging a deeper abyss. Finally its whole bulk emptied into thehollow hills and left the old bed toward the ocean dry. Much of the later city as we now foundit had been built over that former bed. The Old Ones, understanding what had happened, and exercisingtheir always keen artistic sense, had carved into ornate pylons those headlands of the foothillswhere the great stream began its descent into eternal darkness.

This river, once crossed by scores of noble stone bridges, was plainly theone whose extinct course we had seen in our aëroplane survey. Its position in differentcarvings of the city helped us to orient ourselves to the scene as it had been at various stagesof the region’s age-long, aeon-dead history; so that we were able to sketch a hasty butcareful map of the salient features—squares, important buildings, and the like—forguidance in further explorations. We could soon reconstruct in fancy the whole stupendous thingas it was a million or ten million or fifty million years ago, for the sculptures told us exactlywhat the buildings and mountains and squares and suburbs and landscape setting and luxuriantTertiary vegetation had looked like. It must have had a marvellous and mystic beauty, and asI thought of it I almost forgot the clammy sense of sinister oppression with which the city’sinhuman age and massiveness and deadness and remoteness and glacial twilight had choked andweighed on my spirit. Yet according to certain carvings the denizens of that city had themselvesknown the clutch of oppressive terror; for there was a sombre and recurrent type of scene inwhich the Old Ones were shewn in the act of recoiling affrightedly from some object—neverallowed to appear in the design—found in the great river and indicated as having beenwashed down through waving, vine-draped cycad-forests from those horrible westward mountains.

It was only in the one late-built house with the decadent carvings that weobtained any foreshadowing of the final calamity leading to the city’s desertion. Undoubtedlythere must have been many sculptures of the same age elsewhere, even allowing for the slackenedenergies and aspirations of a stressful and uncertain period; indeed, very certain evidenceof the existence of others came to us shortly afterward. But this was the first and only setwe directly encountered. We meant to look farther later on; but as I have said, immediate conditionsdictated another present objective. There would, though, have been a limit—for after allhope of a long future occupancy of the place had perished among the Old Ones, there could notbut have been a complete cessation of mural decoration. The ultimate blow, of course, was thecoming of the great cold which once held most of the earth in thrall, and which has never departedfrom the ill-fated poles—the great cold that, at the world’s other extremity, putan end to the fabled lands of Lomar and Hyperborea.

Just when this tendency began in the antarctic it would be hard to say in termsof exact years. Nowadays we set the beginning of the general glacial periods at a distance ofabout 500,000 years from the present, but at the poles the terrible scourge must have commencedmuch earlier. All quantitative estimates are partly guesswork; but it is quite likely that thedecadent sculptures were made considerably less than a million years ago, and that the actualdesertion of the city was complete long before the conventional opening of the Pleistocene—500,000years ago—as reckoned in terms of the earth’s whole surface.

In the decadent sculptures there were signs of thinner vegetation everywhere,and of a decreased country life on the part of the Old Ones. Heating devices were shewn in thehouses, and winter travellers were represented as muffled in protective fabrics. Then we sawa series of cartouches (the continuous band arrangement being frequently interrupted in theselate carvings) depicting a constantly growing migration to the nearest refuges of greater warmth—somefleeing to cities under the sea off the far-away coast, and some clambering down through networksof limestone caverns in the hollow hills to the neighbouring black abyss of subterrene waters.

In the end it seems to have been the neighbouring abyss which received thegreatest colonisation. This was partly due, no doubt, to the traditional sacredness of thisespecial region; but may have been more conclusively determined by the opportunities it gavefor continuing the use of the great temples on the honeycombed mountains, and for retainingthe vast land city as a place of summer residence and base of communication with various mines.The linkage of old and new abodes was made more effective by means of several gradings and improvementsalong the connecting routes, including the chiselling of numerous direct tunnels from the ancientmetropolis to the black abyss—sharply down-pointing tunnels whose mouths we carefullydrew, according to our most thoughtful estimates, on the guide map we were compiling. It wasobvious that at least two of these tunnels lay within a reasonable exploring distance of wherewe were; both being on the mountainward edge of the city, one less than a quarter-mile towardthe ancient river-course, and the other perhaps twice that distance in the opposite direction.

The abyss, it seems, had shelving shores of dry land at certain places; butthe Old Ones built their new city under water—no doubt because of its greater certaintyof uniform warmth. The depth of the hidden sea appears to have been very great, so that theearth’s internal heat could ensure its habitability for an indefinite period. The beingsseem to have had no trouble in adapting themselves to part-time—and eventually, of course,whole-time—residence under water; since they had never allowed their gill systems to atrophy.There were many sculptures which shewed how they had always frequently visited their submarinekinsfolk elsewhere, and how they had habitually bathed on the deep bottom of their great river.The darkness of inner earth could likewise have been no deterrent to a race accustomed to longantarctic nights.

Decadent though their style undoubtedly was, these latest carvings had a trulyepic quality where they told of the building of the new city in the cavern sea. The Old Oneshad gone about it scientifically; quarrying insoluble rocks from the heart of the honeycombedmountains, and employing expert workers from the nearest submarine city to perform the constructionaccording to the best methods. These workers brought with them all that was necessary to establishthe new venture—shoggoth-tissue from which to breed stone-lifters and subsequent beastsof burden for the cavern city, and other protoplasmic matter to mould into phosphorescent organismsfor lighting purposes.

At last a mighty metropolis rose on the bottom of that Stygian sea; its architecturemuch like that of the city above, and its workmanship displaying relatively little decadencebecause of the precise mathematical element inherent in building operations. The newly bredshoggoths grew to enormous size and singular intelligence, and were represented as taking andexecuting orders with marvellous quickness. They seemed to converse with the Old Ones by mimickingtheir voices—a sort of musical piping over a wide range, if poor Lake’s dissectionhad indicated aright—and to work more from spoken commands than from hypnotic suggestionsas in earlier times. They were, however, kept in admirable control. The phosphorescent organismssupplied light with vast effectiveness, and doubtless atoned for the loss of the familiar polarauroras of the outer-world night.

Art and decoration were pursued, though of course with a certain decadence.The Old Ones seemed to realise this falling off themselves; and in many cases anticipated thepolicy of Constantine the Great by transplanting especially fine blocks of ancient carving fromtheir land city, just as the emperor, in a similar age of decline, stripped Greece and Asiaof their finest art to give his new Byzantine capital greater splendours than its own peoplecould create. That the transfer of sculptured blocks had not been more extensive, was doubtlessowing to the fact that the land city was not at first wholly abandoned. By the time total abandonmentdid occur—and it surely must have occurred before the polar Pleistocene was far advanced—theOld Ones had perhaps become satisfied with their decadent art—or had ceased to recognisethe superior merit of the older carvings. At any rate, the aeon-silent ruins around us had certainlyundergone no wholesale sculptural denudation; though all the best separate statues, like othermoveables, had been taken away.

The decadent cartouches and dadoes telling this story were, as I have said,the latest we could find in our limited search. They left us with a picture of the Old Onesshuttling back and forth betwixt the land city in summer and the sea-cavern city in winter,and sometimes trading with the sea-bottom cities off the antarctic coast. By this time the ultimatedoom of the land city must have been recognised, for the sculptures shewed many signs of thecold’s malign encroachments. Vegetation was declining, and the terrible snows of the winterno longer melted completely even in midsummer. The saurian livestock were nearly all dead, andthe mammals were standing it none too well. To keep on with the work of the upper world it hadbecome necessary to adapt some of the amorphous and curiously cold-resistant shoggoths to landlife; a thing the Old Ones had formerly been reluctant to do. The great river was now lifeless,and the upper sea had lost most of its denizens except the seals and whales. All the birds hadflown away, save only the great, grotesque penguins.

What had happened afterward we could only guess. How long had the new sea-caverncity survived? Was it still down there, a stony corpse in eternal blackness? Had the subterraneanwaters frozen at last? To what fate had the ocean-bottom cities of the outer world been delivered?Had any of the Old Ones shifted north ahead of the creeping ice-cap? Existing geology shewsno trace of their presence. Had the frightful Mi-Go been still a menace in the outer land worldof the north? Could one be sure of what might or might not linger even to this day in the lightlessand unplumbed abysses of earth’s deepest waters? Those things had seemingly been ableto withstand any amount of pressure—and men of the sea have fished up curious objectsat times. And has the killer-whale theory really explained the savage and mysterious scars onantarctic seals noticed a generation ago by Borchgrevingk?

The specimens found by poor Lake did not enter into these guesses, for theirgeologic setting proved them to have lived at what must have been a very early date in the landcity’s history. They were, according to their location, certainly not less than thirtymillion years old; and we reflected that in their day the sea-cavern city, and indeed the cavernitself, had no existence. They would have remembered an older scene, with lush Tertiary vegetationeverywhere, a younger land city of flourishing arts around them, and a great river sweepingnorthward along the base of the mighty mountains toward a far-away tropic ocean.

And yet we could not help thinking about these specimens—especially aboutthe eight perfect ones that were missing from Lake’s hideously ravaged camp. There wassomething abnormal about that whole business—the strange things we had tried so hard tolay to somebody’s madness—those frightful graves—the amount and natureof the missing material—Gedney—the unearthly toughness of those archaic monstrosities,and the queer vital freaks the sculptures now shewed the race to have.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Danforth and I had seen a good deal in the last few hours, and were prepared to believe andkeep silent about many appalling and incredible secrets of primal Nature.

IX.

I have said that our study of the decadent sculptures brought about a change in our immediateobjective. This of course had to do with the chiselled avenues to the black inner world, ofwhose existence we had not known before, but which we were now eager to find and traverse. Fromthe evident scale of the carvings we deduced that a steeply descending walk of about a milethrough either of the neighbouring tunnels would bring us to the brink of the dizzy sunlesscliffs above the great abyss; down whose side adequate paths, improved by the Old Ones, ledto the rocky shore of the hidden and nighted ocean. To behold this fabulous gulf in stark realitywas a lure which seemed impossible of resistance once we knew of the thing—yet we realisedwe must begin the quest at once if we expected to include it on our present flight.

It was now 8 P.M., and we had not enough battery replacements to let our torchesburn on forever. We had done so much of our studying and copying below the glacial level thatour battery supply had had at least five hours of nearly continuous use; and despite the specialdry cell formula would obviously be good for only about four more—though by keeping onetorch unused, except for especially interesting or difficult places, we might manage to ekeout a safe margin beyond that. It would not do to be without a light in these Cyclopean catacombs,hence in order to make the abyss trip we must give up all further mural deciphering. Of coursewe intended to revisit the place for days and perhaps weeks of intensive study and photography—curiosityhaving long ago got the better of horror—but just now we must hasten. Our supply of trail-blazingpaper was far from unlimited, and we were reluctant to sacrifice spare notebooks or sketchingpaper to augment it; but we did let one large notebook go. If worst came to worst, we couldresort to rock-chipping—and of course it would be possible, even in case of really lostdirection, to work up to full daylight by one channel or another if granted sufficient timefor plentiful trial and error. So at last we set off eagerly in the indicated direction of thenearest tunnel.

According to the carvings from which we had made our map, the desired tunnel-mouthcould not be much more than a quarter-mile from where we stood; the intervening space shewingsolid-looking buildings quite likely to be penetrable still at a sub-glacial level. The openingitself would be in the basement—on the angle nearest the foothills—of a vast five-pointedstructure of evidently public and perhaps ceremonial nature, which we tried to identify fromour aërial survey of the ruins. No such structure came to our minds as we recalled ourflight, hence we concluded that its upper parts had been greatly damaged, or that it had beentotally shattered in an ice-rift we had noticed. In the latter case the tunnel would probablyturn out to be choked, so that we would have to try the next nearest one—the one lessthan a mile to the north. The intervening river-course prevented our trying any of the moresoutherly tunnels on this trip; and indeed, if both of the neighbouring ones were choked itwas doubtful whether our batteries would warrant an attempt on the next northerly one—abouta mile beyond our second choice.

As we threaded our dim way through the labyrinth with the aid of map and compass—traversingrooms and corridors in every stage of ruin or preservation, clambering up ramps, crossing upperfloors and bridges and clambering down again, encountering choked doorways and piles of debris,hastening now and then along finely preserved and uncannily immaculate stretches, taking falseleads and retracing our way (in such cases removing the blind paper trail we had left), andonce in a while striking the bottom of an open shaft through which daylight poured or trickleddown—we were repeatedly tantalised by the sculptured walls along our route. Many musthave told tales of immense historical importance, and only the prospect of later visits reconciledus to the need of passing them by. As it was, we slowed down once in a while and turned on oursecond torch. If we had had more films we would certainly have paused briefly to photographcertain bas-reliefs, but time-consuming hand copying was clearly out of the question.

I come now once more to a place where the temptation to hesitate, or to hintrather than state, is very strong. It is necessary, however, to reveal the rest in order tojustify my course in discouraging further exploration. We had wormed our way very close to thecomputed site of the tunnel’s mouth—having crossed a second-story bridge to whatseemed plainly the tip of a pointed wall, and descended to a ruinous corridor especially richin decadently elaborate and apparently ritualistic sculptures of late workmanship—when,about 8:30 P.M., Danforth’s keen young nostrils gave us the first hint of something unusual.If we had had a dog with us, I suppose we would have been warned before. At first we could notprecisely say what was wrong with the formerly crystal-pure air, but after a few seconds ourmemories reacted only too definitely. Let me try to state the thing without flinching. Therewas an odour—and that odour was vaguely, subtly, and unmistakably akin to what had nauseatedus upon opening the insane grave of the horror poor Lake had dissected.

Of course the revelation was not as clearly cut at the time as it sounds now.There were several conceivable explanations, and we did a good deal of indecisive whispering.Most important of all, we did not retreat without further investigation; for having come thisfar, we were loath to be balked by anything short of certain disaster. Anyway, what we musthave suspected was altogether too wild to believe. Such things did not happen in any normalworld. It was probably sheer irrational instinct which made us dim our single torch—temptedno longer by the decadent and sinister sculptures that leered menacingly from the oppressivewalls—and which softened our progress to a cautious tiptoeing and crawling over the increasinglylittered floor and heaps of debris.

Danforth’s eyes as well as nose proved better than mine, for it was likewisehe who first noticed the queer aspect of the debris after we had passed many half-choked archesleading to chambers and corridors on the ground level. It did not look quite as it ought aftercountless thousands of years of desertion, and when we cautiously turned on more light we sawthat a kind of swath seemed to have been lately tracked through it. The irregular nature ofthe litter precluded any definite marks, but in the smoother places there were suggestions ofthe dragging of heavy objects. Once we thought there was a hint of parallel tracks, as if ofrunners. This was what made us pause again.

It was during that pause that we caught—simultaneously this time—theother odour ahead. Paradoxically, it was both a less frightful and a more frightful odour—lessfrightful intrinsically, but infinitely appalling in this place under the known circumstances&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.unless, of course, Gedney.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. For the odour was the plain and familiar oneof common petrol—every-day gasoline.

Our motivation after that is something I will leave to psychologists. We knewnow that some terrible extension of the camp horrors must have crawled into this nighted burial-placeof the aeons, hence could not doubt any longer the existence of nameless conditions—presentor at least recent—just ahead. Yet in the end we did let sheer burning curiosity—oranxiety—or auto-hypnotism—or vague thoughts of responsibility toward Gedney—orwhat not—drive us on. Danforth whispered again of the print he thought he had seen atthe alley-turning in the ruins above; and of the faint musical piping—potentially of tremendoussignificance in the light of Lake’s dissection report despite its close resemblance tothe cave-mouth echoes of the windy peaks—which he thought he had shortly afterward halfheard from unknown depths below. I, in my turn, whispered of how the camp was left—ofwhat had disappeared, and of how the madness of a lone survivor might have conceived the inconceivable—awild trip across the monstrous mountains and a descent into the unknown primal masonry—

But we could not convince each other, or even ourselves, of anything definite.We had turned off all light as we stood still, and vaguely noticed that a trace of deeply filteredupper day kept the blackness from being absolute. Having automatically begun to move ahead,we guided ourselves by occasional flashes from our torch. The disturbed debris formed an impressionwe could not shake off, and the smell of gasoline grew stronger. More and more ruin met oureyes and hampered our feet, until very soon we saw that the forward way was about to cease.We had been all too correct in our pessimistic guess about that rift glimpsed from the air.Our tunnel quest was a blind one, and we were not even going to be able to reach the basementout of which the abyssward aperture opened.

The torch, flashing over the grotesquely carven walls of the blocked corridorin which we stood, shewed several doorways in various states of obstruction; and from one ofthem the gasoline odour—quite submerging that other hint of odour—came with especialdistinctness. As we looked more steadily, we saw that beyond a doubt there had been a slightand recent clearing away of debris from that particular opening. Whatever the lurking horrormight be, we believed the direct avenue toward it was now plainly manifest. I do not think anyonewill wonder that we waited an appreciable time before making any further motion.

And yet, when we did venture inside that black arch, our first impression wasone of anticlimax. For amidst the littered expanse of that sculptured crypt—a perfectcube with sides of about twenty feet—there remained no recent object of instantly discerniblesize; so that we looked instinctively, though in vain, for a farther doorway. In another moment,however, Danforth’s sharp vision had descried a place where the floor debris had beendisturbed; and we turned on both torches full strength. Though what we saw in that light wasactually simple and trifling, I am none the less reluctant to tell of it because of what itimplied. It was a rough levelling of the debris, upon which several small objects lay carelesslyscattered, and at one corner of which a considerable amount of gasoline must have been spilledlately enough to leave a strong odour even at this extreme super-plateau altitude. In otherwords, it could not be other than a sort of camp—a camp made by questing beings who likeus had been turned back by the unexpectedly choked way to the abyss.

Let me be plain. The scattered objects were, so far as substance was concerned,all from Lake’s camp; and consisted of tin cans as queerly opened as those we had seenat that ravaged place, many spent matches, three illustrated books more or less curiously smudged,an empty ink bottle with its pictorial and instructional carton, a broken fountain pen, someoddly snipped fragments of fur and tent-cloth, a used electric battery with circular of directions,a folder that came with our type of tent heater, and a sprinkling of crumpled papers. It wasall bad enough, but when we smoothed out the papers and looked at what was on them we felt wehad come to the worst. We had found certain inexplicably blotted papers at the camp which mighthave prepared us, yet the effect of the sight down there in the pre-human vaults of a nightmarecity was almost too much to bear.

A mad Gedney might have made the groups of dots in imitation of those foundon the greenish soapstones, just as the dots on those insane five-pointed grave-mounds mighthave been made; and he might conceivably have prepared rough, hasty sketches—varying intheir accuracy or lack of it—which outlined the neighbouring parts of the city and tracedthe way from a circularly represented place outside our previous route—a place we identifiedas a great cylindrical tower in the carvings and as a vast circular gulf glimpsed in our aërialsurvey—to the present five-pointed structure and the tunnel-mouth therein. He might, Irepeat, have prepared such sketches; for those before us were quite obviously compiled as ourown had been from late sculptures somewhere in the glacial labyrinth, though not from the oneswhich we had seen and used. But what this art-blind bungler could never have done was to executethose sketches in a strange and assured technique perhaps superior, despite haste and carelessness,to any of the decadent carvings from which they were taken—the characteristic and unmistakabletechnique of the Old Ones themselves in the dead city’s heyday.

There are those who will say Danforth and I were utterly mad not to flee forour lives after that; since our conclusions were now—notwithstanding their wildness—completelyfixed, and of a nature I need not even mention to those who have read my account as far as this.Perhaps we were mad—for have I not said those horrible peaks were mountains of madness?But I think I can detect something of the same spirit—albeit in a less extreme form—inthe men who stalk deadly beasts through African jungles to photograph them or study their habits.Half-paralysed with terror though we were, there was nevertheless fanned within us a blazingflame of awe and curiosity which triumphed in the end.

Of course we did not mean to face that—or those—which we knew hadbeen there, but we felt that they must be gone by now. They would by this time have found theother neighbouring entrance to the abyss, and have passed within to whatever night-black fragmentsof the past might await them in the ultimate gulf—the ultimate gulf they had never seen.Or if that entrance, too, was blocked, they would have gone on to the north seeking another.They were, we remembered, partly independent of light.

Looking back to that moment, I can scarcely recall just what precise form ournew emotions took—just what change of immediate objective it was that so sharpened oursense of expectancy. We certainly did not mean to face what we feared—yet I will not denythat we may have had a lurking, unconscious wish to spy certain things from some hidden vantage-point.Probably we had not given up our zeal to glimpse the abyss itself, though there was interposeda new goal in the form of that great circular place shewn on the crumpled sketches we had found.We had at once recognised it as a monstrous cylindrical tower figuring in the very earliestcarvings, but appearing only as a prodigious round aperture from above. Something about theimpressiveness of its rendering, even in these hasty diagrams, made us think that its sub-glaciallevels must still form a feature of peculiar importance. Perhaps it embodied architectural marvelsas yet unencountered by us. It was certainly of incredible age according to the sculptures inwhich it figured—being indeed among the first things built in the city. Its carvings,if preserved, could not but be highly significant. Moreover, it might form a good present linkwith the upper world—a shorter route than the one we were so carefully blazing, and probablythat by which those others had descended.

At any rate, the thing we did was to study the terrible sketches—whichquite perfectly confirmed our own—and start back over the indicated course to the circularplace; the course which our nameless predecessors must have traversed twice before us. The otherneighbouring gate to the abyss would lie beyond that. I need not speak of our journey—duringwhich we continued to leave an economical trail of paper—for it was precisely the samein kind as that by which we had reached the cul de sac; except that it tended to adhere moreclosely to the ground level and even descend to basement corridors. Every now and then we couldtrace certain disturbing marks in the debris or litter under foot; and after we had passed outsidethe radius of the gasoline scent we were again faintly conscious—spasmodically—ofthat more hideous and more persistent scent. After the way had branched from our former coursewe sometimes gave the rays of our single torch a furtive sweep along the walls; noting in almostevery case the well-nigh omnipresent sculptures, which indeed seem to have formed a main aestheticoutlet for the Old Ones.

About 9:30 P.M., while traversing a vaulted corridor whose increasingly glaciatedfloor seemed somewhat below the ground level and whose roof grew lower as we advanced, we beganto see strong daylight ahead and were able to turn off our torch. It appeared that we were comingto the vast circular place, and that our distance from the upper air could not be very great.The corridor ended in an arch surprisingly low for these megalithic ruins, but we could seemuch through it even before we emerged. Beyond there stretched a prodigious round space—fully200 feet in diameter—strown with debris and containing many choked archways correspondingto the one we were about to cross. The walls were—in available spaces—boldly sculpturedinto a spiral band of heroic proportions; and displayed, despite the destructive weatheringcaused by the openness of the spot, an artistic splendour far beyond anything we had encounteredbefore. The littered floor was quite heavily glaciated, and we fancied that the true bottomlay at a considerably lower depth.

But the salient object of the place was the titanic stone ramp which, eludingthe archways by a sharp turn outward into the open floor, wound spirally up the stupendous cylindricalwall like an inside counterpart of those once climbing outside the monstrous towers or zigguratsof antique Babylon. Only the rapidity of our flight, and the perspective which confounded thedescent with the tower’s inner wall, had prevented our noticing this feature from theair, and thus caused us to seek another avenue to the sub-glacial level. Pabodie might havebeen able to tell what sort of engineering held it in place, but Danforth and I could merelyadmire and marvel. We could see mighty stone corbels and pillars here and there, but what wesaw seemed inadequate to the function performed. The thing was excellently preserved up to thepresent top of the tower—a highly remarkable circumstance in view of its exposure—andits shelter had done much to protect the bizarre and disturbing cosmic sculptures on the walls.

As we stepped out into the awesome half-daylight of this monstrous cylinder-bottom—fiftymillion years old, and without doubt the most primally ancient structure ever to meet our eyes—wesaw that the ramp-traversed sides stretched dizzily up to a height of fully sixty feet. This,we recalled from our aërial survey, meant an outside glaciation of some forty feet; sincethe yawning gulf we had seen from the plane had been at the top of an approximately twenty-footmound of crumbled masonry, somewhat sheltered for three-fourths of its circumference by themassive curving walls of a line of higher ruins. According to the sculptures the original towerhad stood in the centre of an immense circular plaza; and had been perhaps 500 or 600 feet high,with tiers of horizontal discs near the top, and a row of needle-like spires along the upperrim. Most of the masonry had obviously toppled outward rather than inward—a fortunatehappening, since otherwise the ramp might have been shattered and the whole interior choked.As it was, the ramp shewed sad battering; whilst the choking was such that all the archwaysat the bottom seemed to have been recently half-cleared.

It took us only a moment to conclude that this was indeed the route by whichthose others had descended, and that this would be the logical route for our own ascent despitethe long trail of paper we had left elsewhere. The tower’s mouth was no farther from thefoothills and our waiting plane than was the great terraced building we had entered, and anyfurther sub-glacial exploration we might make on this trip would lie in this general region.Oddly, we were still thinking about possible later trips—even after all we had seen andguessed. Then as we picked our way cautiously over the debris of the great floor, there camea sight which for the time excluded all other matters.

It was the neatly huddled array of three sledges in that farther angle of theramp’s lower and outward-projecting course which had hitherto been screened from our view.There they were—the three sledges missing from Lake’s camp—shaken by a hardusage which must have included forcible dragging along great reaches of snowless masonry anddebris, as well as much hand portage over utterly unnavigable places. They were carefully andintelligently packed and strapped, and contained things memorably familiar enough—thegasoline stove, fuel cans, instrument cases, provision tins, tarpaulins obviously bulging withbooks, and some bulging with less obvious contents—everything derived from Lake’sequipment. After what we had found in that other room, we were in a measure prepared for thisencounter. The really great shock came when we stepped over and undid one tarpaulin whose outlineshad peculiarly disquieted us. It seems that others as well as Lake had been interested in collectingtypical specimens; for there were two here, both stiffly frozen, perfectly preserved, patchedwith adhesive plaster where some wounds around the neck had occurred, and wrapped with patentcare to prevent further damage. They were the bodies of young Gedney and the missing dog.

X.

Many people will probably judge us callous as well as mad for thinking about the northward tunneland the abyss so soon after our sombre discovery, and I am not prepared to say that we wouldhave immediately revived such thoughts but for a specific circumstance which broke in upon usand set up a whole new train of speculations. We had replaced the tarpaulin over poor Gedneyand were standing in a kind of mute bewilderment when the sounds finally reached our consciousness—thefirst sounds we had heard since descending out of the open where the mountain wind whined faintlyfrom its unearthly heights. Well known and mundane though they were, their presence in thisremote world of death was more unexpected and unnerving than any grotesque or fabulous tonescould possibly have been—since they gave a fresh upsetting to all our notions of cosmicharmony.

Had it been some trace of that bizarre musical piping over a wide range whichLake’s dissection report had led us to expect in those others—and which, indeed,our overwrought fancies had been reading into every wind-howl we had heard since coming on thecamp horror—it would have had a kind of hellish congruity with the aeon-dead region aroundus. A voice from other epochs belongs in a graveyard of other epochs. As it was, however, thenoise shattered all our profoundly seated adjustments—all our tacit acceptance of theinner antarctic as a waste as utterly and irrevocably void of every vestige of normal life asthe sterile disc of the moon. What we heard was not the fabulous note of any buried blasphemyof elder earth from whose supernal toughness an age-denied polar sun had evoked a monstrousresponse. Instead, it was a thing so mockingly normal and so unerringly familiarised by oursea days off Victoria Land and our camp days at McMurdo Sound that we shuddered to think ofit here, where such things ought not to be. To be brief—it was simply the raucous squawkingof a penguin.

The muffled sound floated from sub-glacial recesses nearly opposite to thecorridor whence we had come—regions manifestly in the direction of that other tunnel tothe vast abyss. The presence of a living water-bird in such a direction—in a world whosesurface was one of age-long and uniform lifelessness—could lead to only one conclusion;hence our first thought was to verify the objective reality of the sound. It was, indeed, repeated;and seemed at times to come from more than one throat. Seeking its source, we entered an archwayfrom which much debris had been cleared; resuming our trail-blazing—with an added paper-supplytaken with curious repugnance from one of the tarpaulin bundles on the sledges—when weleft daylight behind.

As the glaciated floor gave place to a litter of detritus, we plainly discernedsome curious dragging tracks; and once Danforth found a distinct print of a sort whose descriptionwould be only too superfluous. The course indicated by the penguin cries was precisely whatour map and compass prescribed as an approach to the more northerly tunnel-mouth, and we wereglad to find that a bridgeless thoroughfare on the ground and basement levels seemed open. Thetunnel, according to the chart, ought to start from the basement of a large pyramidal structurewhich we seemed vaguely to recall from our aërial survey as remarkably well preserved.Along our path the single torch shewed a customary profusion of carvings, but we did not pauseto examine any of these.

Suddenly a bulky white shape loomed up ahead of us, and we flashed on the secondtorch. It is odd how wholly this new quest had turned our minds from earlier fears of what mightlurk near. Those other ones, having left their supplies in the great circular place, must haveplanned to return after their scouting trip toward or into the abyss; yet we had now discardedall caution concerning them as completely as if they had never existed. This white, waddlingthing was fully six feet high, yet we seemed to realise at once that it was not one of thoseothers. They were larger and dark, and according to the sculptures their motion over land surfaceswas a swift, assured matter despite the queerness of their sea-born tentacle equipment. Butto say that the white thing did not profoundly frighten us would be vain. We were indeed clutchedfor an instant by a primitive dread almost sharper than the worst of our reasoned fears regardingthose others. Then came a flash of anticlimax as the white shape sidled into a lateral archwayto our left to join two others of its kind which had summoned it in raucous tones. For it wasonly a penguin—albeit of a huge, unknown species larger than the greatest of the knownking penguins, and monstrous in its combined albinism and virtual eyelessness.

When we had followed the thing into the archway and turned both our torcheson the indifferent and unheeding group of three we saw that they were all eyeless albinos ofthe same unknown and gigantic species. Their size reminded us of some of the archaic penguinsdepicted in the Old Ones’ sculptures, and it did not take us long to conclude that theywere descended from the same stock—undoubtedly surviving through a retreat to some warmerinner region whose perpetual blackness had destroyed their pigmentation and atrophied theireyes to mere useless slits. That their present habitat was the vast abyss we sought, was notfor a moment to be doubted; and this evidence of the gulf’s continued warmth and habitabilityfilled us with the most curious and subtly perturbing fancies.

We wondered, too, what had caused these three birds to venture out of theirusual domain. The state and silence of the great dead city made it clear that it had at no timebeen an habitual seasonal rookery, whilst the manifest indifference of the trio to our presencemade it seem odd that any passing party of those others should have startled them. Was it possiblethat those others had taken some aggressive action or tried to increase their meat supply? Wedoubted whether that pungent odour which the dogs had hated could cause an equal antipathy inthese penguins; since their ancestors had obviously lived on excellent terms with the Old Ones—anamicable relationship which must have survived in the abyss below as long as any of the OldOnes remained. Regretting—in a flareup of the old spirit of pure science—that wecould not photograph these anomalous creatures, we shortly left them to their squawking andpushed on toward the abyss whose openness was now so positively proved to us, and whose exactdirection occasional penguin tracks made clear.

Not long afterward a steep descent in a long, low, doorless, and peculiarlysculptureless corridor led us to believe that we were approaching the tunnel-mouth at last.We had passed two more penguins, and heard others immediately ahead. Then the corridor endedin a prodigious open space which made us gasp involuntarily—a perfect inverted hemisphere,obviously deep underground; fully an hundred feet in diameter and fifty feet high, with lowarchways opening around all parts of the circumference but one, and that one yawning cavernouslywith a black arched aperture which broke the symmetry of the vault to a height of nearly fifteenfeet. It was the entrance to the great abyss.

In this vast hemisphere, whose concave roof was impressively though decadentlycarved to a likeness of the primordial celestial dome, a few albino penguins waddled—aliensthere, but indifferent and unseeing. The black tunnel yawned indefinitely off at a steep descendinggrade, its aperture adorned with grotesquely chiselled jambs and lintel. From that crypticalmouth we fancied a current of slightly warmer air and perhaps even a suspicion of vapour proceeded;and we wondered what living entities other than penguins the limitless void below, and the contiguoushoneycombings of the land and the titan mountains, might conceal. We wondered, too, whetherthe trace of mountain-top smoke at first suspected by poor Lake, as well as the odd haze wehad ourselves perceived around the rampart-crowned peak, might not be caused by the tortuous-channelledrising of some such vapour from the unfathomed regions of earth’s core.

Entering the tunnel, we saw that its outline was—at least at the start—aboutfifteen feet each way; sides, floor, and arched roof composed of the usual megalithic masonry.The sides were sparsely decorated with cartouches of conventional designs in a late, decadentstyle; and all the construction and carving were marvellously well preserved. The floor wasquite clear, except for a slight detritus bearing outgoing penguin tracks and the inward tracksof those others. The farther one advanced, the warmer it became; so that we were soon unbuttoningour heavy garments. We wondered whether there were any actually igneous manifestations below,and whether the waters of that sunless sea were hot. After a short distance the masonry gaveplace to solid rock, though the tunnel kept the same proportions and presented the same aspectof carved regularity. Occasionally its varying grade became so steep that grooves were cut inthe floor. Several times we noted the mouths of small lateral galleries not recorded in ourdiagrams; none of them such as to complicate the problem of our return, and all of them welcomeas possible refuges in case we met unwelcome entities on their way back from the abyss. Thenameless scent of such things was very distinct. Doubtless it was suicidally foolish to ventureinto that tunnel under the known conditions, but the lure of the unplumbed is stronger in certainpersons than most suspect—indeed, it was just such a lure which had brought us to thisunearthly polar waste in the first place. We saw several penguins as we passed along, and speculatedon the distance we would have to traverse. The carvings had led us to expect a steep downhillwalk of about a mile to the abyss, but our previous wanderings had shewn us that matters ofscale were not wholly to be depended on.

After about a quarter of a mile that nameless scent became greatly accentuated,and we kept very careful track of the various lateral openings we passed. There was no visiblevapour as at the mouth, but this was doubtless due to the lack of contrasting cooler air. Thetemperature was rapidly ascending, and we were not surprised to come upon a careless heap ofmaterial shudderingly familiar to us. It was composed of furs and tent-cloth taken from Lake’scamp, and we did not pause to study the bizarre forms into which the fabrics had been slashed.Slightly beyond this point we noticed a decided increase in the size and number of the side-galleries,and concluded that the densely honeycombed region beneath the higher foothills must now havebeen reached. The nameless scent was now curiously mixed with another and scarcely less offensiveodour—of what nature we could not guess, though we thought of decaying organisms and perhapsunknown subterrene fungi. Then came a startling expansion of the tunnel for which the carvingshad not prepared us—a broadening and rising into a lofty, natural-looking elliptical cavernwith a level floor; some 75 feet long and 50 broad, and with many immense side-passages leadingaway into cryptical darkness.

Though this cavern was natural in appearance, an inspection with both torchessuggested that it had been formed by the artificial destruction of several walls between adjacenthoneycombings. The walls were rough, and the high vaulted roof was thick with stalactites; butthe solid rock floor had been smoothed off, and was free from all debris, detritus, or evendust to a positively abnormal extent. Except for the avenue through which we had come, thiswas true of the floors of all the great galleries opening off from it; and the singularity ofthe condition was such as to set us vainly puzzling. The curious new foetor which had supplementedthe nameless scent was excessively pungent here; so much so that it destroyed all trace of theother. Something about this whole place, with its polished and almost glistening floor, struckus as more vaguely baffling and horrible than any of the monstrous things we had previouslyencountered.

The regularity of the passage immediately ahead, as well as the larger proportionof penguin-droppings there, prevented all confusion as to the right course amidst this plethoraof equally great cave-mouths. Nevertheless we resolved to resume our paper trail-blazing ifany further complexity should develop; for dust tracks, of course, could no longer be expected.Upon resuming our direct progress we cast a beam of torchlight over the tunnel walls—andstopped short in amazement at the supremely radical change which had come over the carvingsin this part of the passage. We realised, of course, the great decadence of the Old Ones’sculpture at the time of the tunnelling; and had indeed noticed the inferior workmanship ofthe arabesques in the stretches behind us. But now, in this deeper section beyond the cavern,there was a sudden difference wholly transcending explanation—a difference in basic natureas well as in mere quality, and involving so profound and calamitous a degradation of skillthat nothing in the hitherto observed rate of decline could have led one to expect it.

This new and degenerate work was coarse, bold, and wholly lacking in delicacyof detail. It was counter-sunk with exaggerated depth in bands following the same general lineas the sparse cartouches of the earlier sections, but the height of the reliefs did not reachthe level of the general surface. Danforth had the idea that it was a second carving—asort of palimpsest formed after the obliteration of a previous design. In nature it was whollydecorative and conventional; and consisted of crude spirals and angles roughly following thequintile mathematical tradition of the Old Ones, yet seeming more like a parody than a perpetuationof that tradition. We could not get it out of our minds that some subtly but profoundly alienelement had been added to the aesthetic feeling behind the technique—an alien element,Danforth guessed, that was responsible for the manifestly laborious substitution. It was like,yet disturbingly unlike, what we had come to recognise as the Old Ones’ art; and I waspersistently reminded of such hybrid things as the ungainly Palmyrene sculptures fashioned inthe Roman manner. That others had recently noticed this belt of carving was hinted by the presenceof a used torch battery on the floor in front of one of the most characteristic designs.

Since we could not afford to spend any considerable time in study, we resumedour advance after a cursory look; though frequently casting beams over the walls to see if anyfurther decorative changes developed. Nothing of the sort was perceived, though the carvingswere in places rather sparse because of the numerous mouths of smooth-floored lateral tunnels.We saw and heard fewer penguins, but thought we caught a vague suspicion of an infinitely distantchorus of them somewhere deep within the earth. The new and inexplicable odour was abominablystrong, and we could detect scarcely a sign of that other nameless scent. Puffs of visible vapourahead bespoke increasing contrasts in temperature, and the relative nearness of the sunlesssea-cliffs of the great abyss. Then, quite unexpectedly, we saw certain obstructions on thepolished floor ahead—obstructions which were quite definitely not penguins—and turnedon our second torch after making sure that the objects were quite stationary.

XI.

Still another time have I come to a place where it is very difficult to proceed. I ought tobe hardened by this stage; but there are some experiences and intimations which scar too deeplyto permit of healing, and leave only such an added sensitiveness that memory reinspires allthe original horror. We saw, as I have said, certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead;and I may add that our nostrils were assailed almost simultaneously by a very curious intensificationof the strange prevailing foetor, now quite plainly mixed with the nameless stench of thoseothers which had gone before us. The light of the second torch left no doubt of what the obstructionswere, and we dared approach them only because we could see, even from a distance, that theywere quite as past all harming power as had been the six similar specimens unearthed from themonstrous star-mounded graves at poor Lake’s camp.

They were, indeed, as lacking in completeness as most of those we had unearthed—thoughit grew plain from the thick, dark-green pool gathering around them that their incompletenesswas of infinitely greater recency. There seemed to be only four of them, whereas Lake’sbulletins would have suggested no less than eight as forming the group which had preceded us.To find them in this state was wholly unexpected, and we wondered what sort of monstrous strugglehad occurred down here in the dark.

Penguins, attacked in a body, retaliate savagely with their beaks; and ourears now made certain the existence of a rookery far beyond. Had those others disturbed sucha place and aroused murderous pursuit? The obstructions did not suggest it, for penguin beaksagainst the tough tissues Lake had dissected could hardly account for the terrible damage ourapproaching glance was beginning to make out. Besides, the huge blind birds we had seen appearedto be singularly peaceful.

Had there, then, been a struggle among those others, and were the absent fourresponsible? If so, where were they? Were they close at hand and likely to form an immediatemenace to us? We glanced anxiously at some of the smooth-floored lateral passages as we continuedour slow and frankly reluctant approach. Whatever the conflict was, it had clearly been thatwhich had frightened the penguins into their unaccustomed wandering. It must, then, have arisennear that faintly heard rookery in the incalculable gulf beyond, since there were no signs thatany birds had normally dwelt here. Perhaps, we reflected, there had been a hideous running fight,with the weaker party seeking to get back to the cached sledges when their pursuers finishedthem. One could picture the daemoniac fray between namelessly monstrous entities as it surgedout of the black abyss with great clouds of frantic penguins squawking and scurrying ahead.

I say that we approached those sprawling and incomplete obstructions slowlyand reluctantly. Would to heaven we had never approached them at all, but had run back at topspeed out of that blasphemous tunnel with the greasily smooth floors and the degenerate muralsaping and mocking the things they had superseded—run back, before we had seen what wedid see, and before our minds were burned with something which will never let us breathe easilyagain!

Both of our torches were turned on the prostrate objects, so that we soon realisedthe dominant factor in their incompleteness. Mauled, compressed, twisted, and ruptured as theywere, their chief common injury was total decapitation. From each one the tentacled starfish-headhad been removed; and as we drew near we saw that the manner of removal looked more like somehellish tearing or suction than like any ordinary form of cleavage. Their noisome dark-greenichor formed a large, spreading pool; but its stench was half overshadowed by that newer andstranger stench, here more pungent than at any other point along our route. Only when we hadcome very close to the sprawling obstructions could we trace that second, unexplainable foetorto any immediate source—and the instant we did so Danforth, remembering certain very vividsculptures of the Old Ones’ history in the Permian age 150 million years ago, gave ventto a nerve-tortured cry which echoed hysterically through that vaulted and archaic passage withthe evil palimpsest carvings.

I came only just short of echoing his cry myself; for I had seen those primalsculptures, too, and had shudderingly admired the way the nameless artist had suggested thathideous slime-coating found on certain incomplete and prostrate Old Ones—those whom thefrightful shoggoths had characteristically slain and sucked to a ghastly headlessness in thegreat war of re-subjugation. They were infamous, nightmare sculptures even when telling of age-old,bygone things; for shoggoths and their work ought not to be seen by human beings or portrayedby any beings. The mad author of the Necronomicon had nervously tried to swear that nonehad been bred on this planet, and that only drugged dreamers had ever conceived them. Formlessprotoplasm able to mock and reflect all forms and organs and processes—viscous agglutinationsof bubbling cells—rubbery fifteen-foot spheroids infinitely plastic and ductile—slavesof suggestion, builders of cities—more and more sullen, more and more intelligent, moreand more amphibious, more and more imitative—Great God! What madness made even those blasphemousOld Ones willing to use and to carve such things?

And now, when Danforth and I saw the freshly glistening and reflectively iridescentblack slime which clung thickly to those headless bodies and stank obscenely with that new unknownodour whose cause only a diseased fancy could envisage—clung to those bodies and sparkledless voluminously on a smooth part of the accursedly re-sculptured wall in a series of groupeddots—we understood the quality of cosmic fear to its uttermost depths. It was notfear of those four missing others—for all too well did we suspect they would do no harmagain. Poor devils! After all, they were not evil things of their kind. They were the men ofanother age and another order of being. Nature had played a hellish jest on them—as itwill on any others that human madness, callousness, or cruelty may hereafter drag up in thathideously dead or sleeping polar waste—and this was their tragic homecoming.

They had not been even savages—for what indeed had they done? That awfulawakening in the cold of an unknown epoch—perhaps an attack by the furry, franticallybarking quadrupeds, and a dazed defence against them and the equally frantic white simians withthe queer wrappings and paraphernalia&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. poor Lake, poor Gedney&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.and poor Old Ones! Scientists to the last—what had they done that we would not have donein their place? God, what intelligence and persistence! What a facing of the incredible, justas those carven kinsmen and forbears had faced things only a little less incredible! Radiates,vegetables, monstrosities, star-spawn—whatever they had been, they were men!

They had crossed the icy peaks on whose templed slopes they had once worshippedand roamed among the tree-ferns. They had found their dead city brooding under its curse, andhad read its carven latter days as we had done. They had tried to reach their living fellowsin fabled depths of blackness they had never seen—and what had they found? All this flashedin unison through the thoughts of Danforth and me as we looked from those headless, slime-coatedshapes to the loathsome palimpsest sculptures and the diabolical dot-groups of fresh slime onthe wall beside them—looked and understood what must have triumphed and survived downthere in the Cyclopean water-city of that nighted, penguin-fringed abyss, whence even now asinister curling mist had begun to belch pallidly as if in answer to Danforth’s hystericalscream.

The shock of recognising that monstrous slime and headlessness had frozen usinto mute, motionless statues, and it is only through later conversations that we have learnedof the complete identity of our thoughts at that moment. It seemed aeons that we stood there,but actually it could not have been more than ten or fifteen seconds. That hateful, pallid mistcurled forward as if veritably driven by some remoter advancing bulk—and then came a soundwhich upset much of what we had just decided, and in so doing broke the spell and enabled usto run like mad past squawking, confused penguins over our former trail back to the city, alongice-sunken megalithic corridors to the great open circle, and up that archaic spiral ramp ina frenzied automatic plunge for the sane outer air and light of day.

The new sound, as I have intimated, upset much that we had decided; becauseit was what poor Lake’s dissection had led us to attribute to those we had just judgeddead. It was, Danforth later told me, precisely what he had caught in infinitely muffled formwhen at that spot beyond the alley-corner above the glacial level; and it certainly had a shockingresemblance to the wind-pipings we had both heard around the lofty mountain caves. At the riskof seeming puerile I will add another thing, too; if only because of the surprising way Danforth’simpression chimed with mine. Of course common reading is what prepared us both to make the interpretation,though Danforth has hinted at queer notions about unsuspected and forbidden sources to whichPoe may have had access when writing his Arthur Gordon Pym a century ago. It will beremembered that in that fantastic tale there is a word of unknown but terrible and prodigioussignificance connected with the antarctic and screamed eternally by the gigantic, spectrallysnowy birds of that malign region’s core. “Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!” That,I may admit, is exactly what we thought we heard conveyed by that sudden sound behind the advancingwhite mist—that insidious musical piping over a singularly wide range.

We were in full flight before three notes or syllables had been uttered, thoughwe knew that the swiftness of the Old Ones would enable any scream-roused and pursuing survivorof the slaughter to overtake us in a moment if it really wished to do so. We had a vague hope,however, that non-aggressive conduct and a display of kindred reason might cause such a beingto spare us in case of capture; if only from scientific curiosity. After all, if such an onehad nothing to fear for itself it would have no motive in harming us. Concealment being futileat this juncture, we used our torch for a running glance behind, and perceived that the mistwas thinning. Would we see, at last, a complete and living specimen of those others? Again camethat insidious musical piping—“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!”

Then, noting that we were actually gaining on our pursuer, it occurred to usthat the entity might be wounded. We could take no chances, however, since it was very obviouslyapproaching in answer to Danforth’s scream rather than in flight from any other entity.The timing was too close to admit of doubt. Of the whereabouts of that less conceivable andless mentionable nightmare—that foetid, unglimpsed mountain of slime-spewing protoplasmwhose race had conquered the abyss and sent land pioneers to re-carve and squirm through theburrows of the hills—we could form no guess; and it cost us a genuine pang to leave thisprobably crippled Old One—perhaps a lone survivor—to the peril of recapture anda nameless fate.

Thank heaven we did not slacken our run. The curling mist had thickened again,and was driving ahead with increased speed; whilst the straying penguins in our rear were squawkingand screaming and displaying signs of a panic really surprising in view of their relativelyminor confusion when we had passed them. Once more came that sinister, wide-ranged piping—“Tekeli-li!Tekeli-li!” We had been wrong. The thing was not wounded, but had merely paused onencountering the bodies of its fallen kindred and the hellish slime inscription above them.We could never know what that daemon message was—but those burials at Lake’s camphad shewn how much importance the beings attached to their dead. Our recklessly used torch nowrevealed ahead of us the large open cavern where various ways converged, and we were glad tobe leaving those morbid palimpsest sculptures—almost felt even when scarcely seen—behind.

Another thought which the advent of the cave inspired was the possibility oflosing our pursuer at this bewildering focus of large galleries. There were several of the blindalbino penguins in the open space, and it seemed clear that their fear of the oncoming entitywas extreme to the point of unaccountability. If at that point we dimmed our torch to the verylowest limit of travelling need, keeping it strictly in front of us, the frightened squawkingmotions of the huge birds in the mist might muffle our footfalls, screen our true course, andsomehow set up a false lead. Amidst the churning, spiralling fog the littered and unglisteningfloor of the main tunnel beyond this point, as differing from the other morbidly polished burrows,could hardly form a highly distinguishing feature; even, so far as we could conjecture, forthose indicated special senses which made the Old Ones partly though imperfectly independentof light in emergencies. In fact, we were somewhat apprehensive lest we go astray ourselvesin our haste. For we had, of course, decided to keep straight on toward the dead city; sincethe consequences of loss in those unknown foothill honeycombings would be unthinkable.

The fact that we survived and emerged is sufficient proof that the thing didtake a wrong gallery whilst we providentially hit on the right one. The penguins alone couldnot have saved us, but in conjunction with the mist they seem to have done so. Only a benignfate kept the curling vapours thick enough at the right moment, for they were constantly shiftingand threatening to vanish. Indeed, they did lift for a second just before we emerged from thenauseously re-sculptured tunnel into the cave; so that we actually caught one first and onlyhalf-glimpse of the oncoming entity as we cast a final, desperately fearful glance backwardbefore dimming the torch and mixing with the penguins in the hope of dodging pursuit. If thefate which screened us was benign, that which gave us the half-glimpse was infinitely the opposite;for to that flash of semi-vision can be traced a full half of the horror which has ever sincehaunted us.

Our exact motive in looking back again was perhaps no more than the immemorialinstinct of the pursued to gauge the nature and course of its pursuer; or perhaps it was anautomatic attempt to answer a subconscious question raised by one of our senses. In the midstof our flight, with all our faculties centred on the problem of escape, we were in no conditionto observe and analyse details; yet even so our latent brain-cells must have wondered at themessage brought them by our nostrils. Afterward we realised what it was—that our retreatfrom the foetid slime-coating on those headless obstructions, and the coincident approach ofthe pursuing entity, had not brought us the exchange of stenches which logic called for. Inthe neighbourhood of the prostrate things that new and lately unexplainable foetor had beenwholly dominant; but by this time it ought to have largely given place to the nameless stenchassociated with those others. This it had not done—for instead, the newer and less bearablesmell was now virtually undiluted, and growing more and more poisonously insistent each second.

So we glanced back—simultaneously, it would appear; though no doubt theincipient motion of one prompted the imitation of the other. As we did so we flashed both torchesfull strength at the momentarily thinned mist; either from sheer primitive anxiety to see allwe could, or in a less primitive but equally unconscious effort to dazzle the entity beforewe dimmed our light and dodged among the penguins of the labyrinth-centre ahead. Unhappy act!Not Orpheus himself, or Lot’s wife, paid much more dearly for a backward glance. And againcame that shocking, wide-ranged piping—“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!”

I might as well be frank—even if I cannot bear to be quite direct—instating what we saw; though at the time we felt that it was not to be admitted even to eachother. The words reaching the reader can never even suggest the awfulness of the sight itself.It crippled our consciousness so completely that I wonder we had the residual sense to dim ourtorches as planned, and to strike the right tunnel toward the dead city. Instinct alone musthave carried us through—perhaps better than reason could have done; though if that waswhat saved us, we paid a high price. Of reason we certainly had little enough left. Danforthwas totally unstrung, and the first thing I remember of the rest of the journey was hearinghim light-headedly chant an hysterical formula in which I alone of mankind could have foundanything but insane irrelevance. It reverberated in falsetto echoes among the squawks of thepenguins; reverberated through the vaultings ahead, and—thank God—through the nowempty vaultings behind. He could not have begun it at once—else we would not have beenalive and blindly racing. I shudder to think of what a shade of difference in his nervous reactionsmight have brought.

“South Station Under—Washington Under—Park Street Under—Kendall—Central—Harvard.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”The poor fellow was chanting the familiar stations of the Boston-Cambridge tunnel that burrowedthrough our peaceful native soil thousands of miles away in New England, yet to me the ritualhad neither irrelevance nor home-feeling. It had only horror, because I knew unerringly themonstrous, nefandous analogy that had suggested it. We had expected, upon looking back, to seea terrible and incredibly moving entity if the mists were thin enough; but of that entity wehad formed a clear idea. What we did see—for the mists were indeed all too malignly thinned—wassomething altogether different, and immeasurably more hideous and detestable. It was the utter,objective embodiment of the fantastic novelist’s ‘thing that should not be’;and its nearest comprehensible analogue is a vast, onrushing subway train as one sees it froma station platform—the great black front looming colossally out of infinite subterraneousdistance, constellated with strangely coloured lights and filling the prodigious burrow as apiston fills a cylinder.

But we were not on a station platform. We were on the track ahead as the nightmareplastic column of foetid black iridescence oozed tightly onward through its fifteen-foot sinus;gathering unholy speed and driving before it a spiral, re-thickening cloud of the pallid abyss-vapour.It was a terrible, indescribable thing vaster than any subway train—a shapeless congeriesof protoplasmic bubbles, faintly self-luminous, and with myriads of temporary eyes forming andunforming as pustules of greenish light all over the tunnel-filling front that bore down uponus, crushing the frantic penguins and slithering over the glistening floor that it and its kindhad swept so evilly free of all litter. Still came that eldritch, mocking cry—“Tekeli-li!Tekeli-li!” And at last we remembered that the daemoniac shoggoths—given life,thought, and plastic organ patterns solely by the Old Ones, and having no language save thatwhich the dot-groups expressed—had likewise no voice save the imitated accents of theirbygone masters.

XII.

Danforth and I have recollections of emerging into the great sculptured hemisphere and of threadingour back trail through the Cyclopean rooms and corridors of the dead city; yet these are purelydream-fragments involving no memory of volition, details, or physical exertion. It was as ifwe floated in a nebulous world or dimension without time, causation, or orientation. The greyhalf-daylight of the vast circular space sobered us somewhat; but we did not go near those cachedsledges or look again at poor Gedney and the dog. They have a strange and titanic mausoleum,and I hope the end of this planet will find them still undisturbed.

It was while struggling up the colossal spiral incline that we first felt theterrible fatigue and short breath which our race through the thin plateau air had produced;but not even the fear of collapse could make us pause before reaching the normal outer realmof sun and sky. There was something vaguely appropriate about our departure from those buriedepochs; for as we wound our panting way up the sixty-foot cylinder of primal masonry we glimpsedbeside us a continuous procession of heroic sculptures in the dead race’s early and undecayedtechnique—a farewell from the Old Ones, written fifty million years ago.

Finally scrambling out at the top, we found ourselves on a great mound of tumbledblocks; with the curved walls of higher stonework rising westward, and the brooding peaks ofthe great mountains shewing beyond the more crumbled structures toward the east. The low antarcticsun of midnight peered redly from the southern horizon through rifts in the jagged ruins, andthe terrible age and deadness of the nightmare city seemed all the starker by contrast withsuch relatively known and accustomed things as the features of the polar landscape. The skyabove was a churning and opalescent mass of tenuous ice-vapours, and the cold clutched at ourvitals. Wearily resting the outfit-bags to which we had instinctively clung throughout our desperateflight, we rebuttoned our heavy garments for the stumbling climb down the mound and the walkthrough the aeon-old stone maze to the foothills where our aëroplane waited. Of what hadset us fleeing from the darkness of earth’s secret and archaic gulfs we said nothing atall.

In less than a quarter of an hour we had found the steep grade to the foothills—theprobable ancient terrace—by which we had descended, and could see the dark bulk of ourgreat plane amidst the sparse ruins on the rising slope ahead. Half way uphill toward our goalwe paused for a momentary breathing-spell, and turned to look again at the fantastic palaeogeantangle of incredible stone shapes below us—once more outlined mystically against an unknownwest. As we did so we saw that the sky beyond had lost its morning haziness; the restless ice-vapourshaving moved up to the zenith, where their mocking outlines seemed on the point of settlinginto some bizarre pattern which they feared to make quite definite or conclusive.

There now lay revealed on the ultimate white horizon behind the grotesque citya dim, elfin line of pinnacled violet whose needle-pointed heights loomed dream-like againstthe beckoning rose-colour of the western sky. Up toward this shimmering rim sloped the ancienttable-land, the depressed course of the bygone river traversing it as an irregular ribbon ofshadow. For a second we gasped in admiration of the scene’s unearthly cosmic beauty, andthen vague horror began to creep into our souls. For this far violet line could be nothing elsethan the terrible mountains of the forbidden land—highest of earth’s peaks and focusof earth’s evil; harbourers of nameless horrors and Archaean secrets; shunned and prayedto by those who feared to carve their meaning; untrodden by any living thing of earth, but visitedby the sinister lightnings and sending strange beams across the plains in the polar night—beyonddoubt the unknown archetype of that dreaded Kadath in the Cold Waste beyond abhorrent Leng,whereof unholy primal legends hint evasively. We were the first human beings ever to see them—andI hope to God we may be the last.

If the sculptured maps and pictures in that pre-human city had told truly,these cryptic violet mountains could not be much less than 300 miles away; yet none the lesssharply did their dim elfin essence jut above that remote and snowy rim, like the serrated edgeof a monstrous alien planet about to rise into unaccustomed heavens. Their height, then, musthave been tremendous beyond all known comparison—carrying them up into tenuous atmosphericstrata peopled by such gaseous wraiths as rash flyers have barely lived to whisper of afterunexplainable falls. Looking at them, I thought nervously of certain sculptured hints of whatthe great bygone river had washed down into the city from their accursed slopes—and wonderedhow much sense and how much folly had lain in the fears of those Old Ones who carved them soreticently. I recalled how their northerly end must come near the coast at Queen Mary Land,where even at that moment Sir Douglas Mawson’s expedition was doubtless working less thana thousand miles away; and hoped that no evil fate would give Sir Douglas and his men a glimpseof what might lie beyond the protecting coastal range. Such thoughts formed a measure of myoverwrought condition at the time—and Danforth seemed to be even worse.

Yet long before we had passed the great star-shaped ruin and reached our planeour fears had become transferred to the lesser but vast enough range whose re-crossing lay aheadof us. From these foothills the black, ruin-crusted slopes reared up starkly and hideously againstthe east, again reminding us of those strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich; and whenwe thought of the damnable honeycombs inside them, and of the frightful amorphous entities thatmight have pushed their foetidly squirming way even to the topmost hollow pinnacles, we couldnot face without panic the prospect of again sailing by those suggestive skyward cave-mouthswhere the wind made sounds like an evil musical piping over a wide range. To make matters worse,we saw distinct traces of local mist around several of the summits—as poor Lake must havedone when he made that early mistake about volcanism—and thought shiveringly of that kindredmist from which we had just escaped; of that, and of the blasphemous, horror-fostering abysswhence all such vapours came.

All was well with the plane, and we clumsily hauled on our heavy flying furs.Danforth got the engine started without trouble, and we made a very smooth takeoff over thenightmare city. Below us the primal Cyclopean masonry spread out as it had done when first wesaw it—so short, yet infinitely long, a time ago—and we began rising and turningto test the wind for our crossing through the pass. At a very high level there must have beengreat disturbance, since the ice-dust clouds of the zenith were doing all sorts of fantasticthings; but at 24,000 feet, the height we needed for the pass, we found navigation quite practicable.As we drew close to the jutting peaks the wind’s strange piping again became manifest,and I could see Danforth’s hands trembling at the controls. Rank amateur though I was,I thought at that moment that I might be a better navigator than he in effecting the dangerouscrossing between pinnacles; and when I made motions to change seats and take over his dutieshe did not protest. I tried to keep all my skill and self-possession about me, and stared atthe sector of reddish farther sky betwixt the walls of the pass—resolutely refusing topay attention to the puffs of mountain-top vapour, and wishing that I had wax-stopped ears likeUlysses’ men off the Sirens’ coast to keep that disturbing wind-piping from my consciousness.

But Danforth, released from his piloting and keyed up to a dangerous nervouspitch, could not keep quiet. I felt him turning and wriggling about as he looked back at theterrible receding city, ahead at the cave-riddled, cube-barnacled peaks, sidewise at the bleaksea of snowy, rampart-strown foothills, and upward at the seething, grotesquely clouded sky.It was then, just as I was trying to steer safely through the pass, that his mad shrieking broughtus so close to disaster by shattering my tight hold on myself and causing me to fumble helplesslywith the controls for a moment. A second afterward my resolution triumphed and we made the crossingsafely—yet I am afraid that Danforth will never be the same again.

I have said that Danforth refused to tell me what final horror made him screamout so insanely—a horror which, I feel sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his presentbreakdown. We had snatches of shouted conversation above the wind’s piping and the engine’sbuzzing as we reached the safe side of the range and swooped slowly down toward the camp, butthat had mostly to do with the pledges of secrecy we had made as we prepared to leave the nightmarecity. Certain things, we had agreed, were not for people to know and discuss lightly—andI would not speak of them now but for the need of heading off that Starkweather-Moore Expedition,and others, at any cost. It is absolutely necessary, for the peace and safety of mankind, thatsome of earth’s dark, dead corners and unplumbed depths be let alone; lest sleeping abnormalitieswake to resurgent life, and blasphemously surviving nightmares squirm and splash out of theirblack lairs to newer and wider conquests.

All that Danforth has ever hinted is that the final horror was a mirage. Itwas not, he declares, anything connected with the cubes and caves of echoing, vaporous, wormilyhoneycombed mountains of madness which we crossed; but a single fantastic, daemoniac glimpse,among the churning zenith-clouds, of what lay back of those other violet westward mountainswhich the Old Ones had shunned and feared. It is very probable that the thing was a sheer delusionborn of the previous stresses we had passed through, and of the actual though unrecognised mirageof the dead transmontane city experienced near Lake’s camp the day before; but it wasso real to Danforth that he suffers from it still.

He has on rare occasions whispered disjointed and irresponsible things about“the black pit”, “the carven rim”, “the proto-shoggoths”,“the windowless solids with five dimensions”, “the nameless cylinder”,“the elder pharos”, “Yog-Sothoth”, “the primal white jelly”,“the colour out of space”, “the wings”, “the eyes in darkness”,“the moon-ladder”, “the original, the eternal, the undying”, and otherbizarre conceptions; but when he is fully himself he repudiates all this and attributes it tohis curious and macabre reading of earlier years. Danforth, indeed, is known to be among thefew who have ever dared go completely through that worm-riddled copy of the Necronomiconkept under lock and key in the college library.

The higher sky, as we crossed the range, was surely vaporous and disturbedenough; and although I did not see the zenith I can well imagine that its swirls of ice-dustmay have taken strange forms. Imagination, knowing how vividly distant scenes can sometimesbe reflected, refracted, and magnified by such layers of restless cloud, might easily have suppliedthe rest—and of course Danforth did not hint any of those specific horrors till afterhis memory had had a chance to draw on his bygone reading. He could never have seen so muchin one instantaneous glance.

At the time his shrieks were confined to the repetition of a single mad wordof all too obvious source:

“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!”
