In a dream Kuranes saw the city in the valley, and the sea-coast beyond, and the snowy peakoverlooking the sea, and the gaily painted galleys that sail out of the harbour toward the distantregions where the sea meets the sky. In a dream it was also that he came by his name of Kuranes,for when awake he was called by another name. Perhaps it was natural for him to dream a newname; for he was the last of his family, and alone among the indifferent millions of London,so there were not many to speak to him and remind him who he had been. His money and lands weregone, and he did not care for the ways of people about him, but preferred to dream and writeof his dreams. What he wrote was laughed at by those to whom he shewed it, so that after a timehe kept his writings to himself, and finally ceased to write. The more he withdrew from theworld about him, the more wonderful became his dreams; and it would have been quite futile totry to describe them on paper. Kuranes was not modern, and did not think like others who wrote.Whilst they strove to strip from life its embroidered robes of myth, and to shew in naked uglinessthe foul thing that is reality, Kuranes sought for beauty alone. When truth and experience failedto reveal it, he sought it in fancy and illusion, and found it on his very doorstep, amid thenebulous memories of childhood tales and dreams.

There are not many persons who know what wonders are opened to them in thestories and visions of their youth; for when as children we listen and dream, we think but half-formedthoughts, and when as men we try to remember, we are dulled and prosaic with the poison of life.But some of us awake in the night with strange phantasms of enchanted hills and gardens, offountains that sing in the sun, of golden cliffs overhanging murmuring seas, of plains thatstretch down to sleeping cities of bronze and stone, and of shadowy companies of heroes thatride caparisoned white horses along the edges of thick forests; and then we know that we havelooked back through the ivory gates into that world of wonder which was ours before we werewise and unhappy.

Kuranes came very suddenly upon his old world of childhood. He had been dreamingof the house where he was born; the great stone house covered with ivy, where thirteen generationsof his ancestors had lived, and where he had hoped to die. It was moonlight, and he had stolenout into the fragrant summer night, through the gardens, down the terraces, past the great oaksof the park, and along the long white road to the village. The village seemed very old, eatenaway at the edge like the moon which had commenced to wane, and Kuranes wondered whether thepeaked roofs of the small houses hid sleep or death. In the streets were spears of long grass,and the window-panes on either side were either broken or filmily staring. Kuranes had not lingered,but had plodded on as though summoned toward some goal. He dared not disobey the summons forfear it might prove an illusion like the urges and aspirations of waking life, which do notlead to any goal. Then he had been drawn down a lane that led off from the village street towardthe channel cliffs, and had come to the end of things—to the precipice and the abyss whereall the village and all the world fell abruptly into the unechoing emptiness of infinity, andwhere even the sky ahead was empty and unlit by the crumbling moon and the peering stars. Faithhad urged him on, over the precipice and into the gulf, where he had floated down, down, down;past dark, shapeless, undreamed dreams, faintly glowing spheres that may have been partly dreameddreams, and laughing winged things that seemed to mock the dreamers of all the worlds. Thena rift seemed to open in the darkness before him, and he saw the city of the valley, glisteningradiantly far, far below, with a background of sea and sky, and a snow-capped mountain nearthe shore.

Kuranes had awaked the very moment he beheld the city, yet he knew from hisbrief glance that it was none other than Celephaïs, in the Valley of Ooth-Nargai beyondthe Tanarian Hills, where his spirit had dwelt all the eternity of an hour one summer afternoonvery long ago, when he had slipt away from his nurse and let the warm sea-breeze lull him tosleep as he watched the clouds from the cliff near the village. He had protested then, whenthey had found him, waked him, and carried him home, for just as he was aroused he had beenabout to sail in a golden galley for those alluring regions where the sea meets the sky. Andnow he was equally resentful of awaking, for he had found his fabulous city after forty wearyyears.

But three nights afterward Kuranes came again to Celephaïs. As before,he dreamed first of the village that was asleep or dead, and of the abyss down which one mustfloat silently; then the rift appeared again, and he beheld the glittering minarets of the city,and saw the graceful galleys riding at anchor in the blue harbour, and watched the gingko treesof Mount Aran swaying in the sea-breeze. But this time he was not snatched away, and like awinged being settled gradually over a grassy hillside till finally his feet rested gently onthe turf. He had indeed come back to the Valley of Ooth-Nargai and the splendid city of Celephaïs.

Down the hill amid scented grasses and brilliant flowers walked Kuranes, overthe bubbling Naraxa on the small wooden bridge where he had carved his name so many years ago,and through the whispering grove to the great stone bridge by the city gate. All was as of old,nor were the marble walls discoloured, nor the polished bronze statues upon them tarnished.And Kuranes saw that he need not tremble lest the things he knew be vanished; for even the sentrieson the ramparts were the same, and still as young as he remembered them. When he entered thecity, past the bronze gates and over the onyx pavements, the merchants and camel-drivers greetedhim as if he had never been away; and it was the same at the turquoise temple of Nath-Horthath,where the orchid-wreathed priests told him that there is no time in Ooth-Nargai, but only perpetualyouth. Then Kuranes walked through the Street of Pillars to the seaward wall, where gatheredthe traders and sailors, and strange men from the regions where the sea meets the sky. Therehe stayed long, gazing out over the bright harbour where the ripples sparkled beneath an unknownsun, and where rode lightly the galleys from far places over the water. And he gazed also uponMount Aran rising regally from the shore, its lower slopes green with swaying trees and itswhite summit touching the sky.

More than ever Kuranes wished to sail in a galley to the far places of whichhe had heard so many strange tales, and he sought again the captain who had agreed to carryhim so long ago. He found the man, Athib, sitting on the same chest of spices he had sat uponbefore, and Athib seemed not to realise that any time had passed. Then the two rowed to a galleyin the harbour, and giving orders to the oarsmen, commenced to sail out into the billowy CerenerianSea that leads to the sky. For several days they glided undulatingly over the water, till finallythey came to the horizon, where the sea meets the sky. Here the galley paused not at all, butfloated easily in the blue of the sky among fleecy clouds tinted with rose. And far beneaththe keel Kuranes could see strange lands and rivers and cities of surpassing beauty, spreadindolently in the sunshine which seemed never to lessen or disappear. At length Athib told himthat their journey was near its end, and that they would soon enter the harbour of Serannian,the pink marble city of the clouds, which is built on that ethereal coast where the west windflows into the sky; but as the highest of the city’s carven towers came into sight therewas a sound somewhere in space, and Kuranes awaked in his London garret.

For many months after that Kuranes sought the marvellous city of Celephaïsand its sky-bound galleys in vain; and though his dreams carried him to many gorgeous and unheard-ofplaces, no one whom he met could tell him how to find Ooth-Nargai, beyond the Tanarian Hills.One night he went flying over dark mountains where there were faint, lone campfires at greatdistances apart, and strange, shaggy herds with tinkling bells on the leaders; and in the wildestpart of this hilly country, so remote that few men could ever have seen it, he found a hideouslyancient wall or causeway of stone zigzagging along the ridges and valleys; too gigantic everto have risen by human hands, and of such a length that neither end of it could be seen. Beyondthat wall in the grey dawn he came to a land of quaint gardens and cherry trees, and when thesun rose he beheld such beauty of red and white flowers, green foliage and lawns, white paths,diamond brooks, blue lakelets, carven bridges, and red-roofed pagodas, that he for a momentforgot Celephaïs in sheer delight. But he remembered it again when he walked down a whitepath toward a red-roofed pagoda, and would have questioned the people of that land about it,had he not found that there were no people there, but only birds and bees and butterflies. Onanother night Kuranes walked up a damp stone spiral stairway endlessly, and came to a towerwindow overlooking a mighty plain and river lit by the full moon; and in the silent city thatspread away from the river-bank he thought he beheld some feature or arrangement which he hadknown before. He would have descended and asked the way to Ooth-Nargai had not a fearsome aurorasputtered up from some remote place beyond the horizon, shewing the ruin and antiquity of thecity, and the stagnation of the reedy river, and the death lying upon that land, as it had lainsince King Kynaratholis came home from his conquests to find the vengeance of the gods.

So Kuranes sought fruitlessly for the marvellous city of Celephaïs andits galleys that sail to Serannian in the sky, meanwhile seeing many wonders and once barelyescaping from the high-priest not to be described, which wears a yellow silken mask over itsface and dwells all alone in a prehistoric stone monastery on the cold desert plateau of Leng.In time he grew so impatient of the bleak intervals of day that he began buying drugs in orderto increase his periods of sleep. Hasheesh helped a great deal, and once sent him to a partof space where form does not exist, but where glowing gases study the secrets of existence.And a violet-coloured gas told him that this part of space was outside what he had called infinity.The gas had not heard of planets and organisms before, but identified Kuranes merely as onefrom the infinity where matter, energy, and gravitation exist. Kuranes was now very anxiousto return to minaret-studded Celephaïs, and increased his doses of drugs; but eventuallyhe had no more money left, and could buy no drugs. Then one summer day he was turned out ofhis garret, and wandered aimlessly through the streets, drifting over a bridge to a place wherethe houses grew thinner and thinner. And it was there that fulfilment came, and he met the cortegeof knights come from Celephaïs to bear him thither forever.

Handsome knights they were, astride roan horses and clad in shining armourwith tabards of cloth-of-gold curiously emblazoned. So numerous were they, that Kuranes almostmistook them for an army, but their leader told him they were sent in his honour; since it washe who had created Ooth-Nargai in his dreams, on which account he was now to be appointed itschief god for evermore. Then they gave Kuranes a horse and placed him at the head of the cavalcade,and all rode majestically through the downs of Surrey and onward toward the region where Kuranesand his ancestors were born. It was very strange, but as the riders went on they seemed to gallopback through Time; for whenever they passed through a village in the twilight they saw onlysuch houses and villages as Chaucer or men before him might have seen, and sometimes they sawknights on horseback with small companies of retainers. When it grew dark they travelled moreswiftly, till soon they were flying uncannily as if in the air. In the dim dawn they came uponthe village which Kuranes had seen alive in his childhood, and asleep or dead in his dreams.It was alive now, and early villagers courtesied as the horsemen clattered down the street andturned off into the lane that ends in the abyss of dream. Kuranes had previously entered thatabyss only at night, and wondered what it would look like by day; so he watched anxiously asthe column approached its brink. Just as they galloped up the rising ground to the precipicea golden glare came somewhere out of the east and hid all the landscape in its effulgent draperies.The abyss was now a seething chaos of roseate and cerulean splendour, and invisible voices sangexultantly as the knightly entourage plunged over the edge and floated gracefully down pastglittering clouds and silvery coruscations. Endlessly down the horsemen floated, their chargerspawing the aether as if galloping over golden sands; and then the luminous vapours spread apartto reveal a greater brightness, the brightness of the city Celephaïs, and the sea-coastbeyond, and the snowy peak overlooking the sea, and the gaily painted galleys that sail outof the harbour toward distant regions where the sea meets the sky.

And Kuranes reigned thereafter over Ooth-Nargai and all the neighbouring regionsof dream, and held his court alternately in Celephaïs and in the cloud-fashioned Serannian.He reigns there still, and will reign happily forever, though below the cliffs at Innsmouththe channel tides played mockingly with the body of a tramp who had stumbled through the half-desertedvillage at dawn; played mockingly, and cast it upon the rocks by ivy-covered Trevor Towers,where a notably fat and especially offensive millionaire brewer enjoys the purchased atmosphereof extinct nobility.
