[Note: Barlow’s contributions are in brackets.]

Dam Bor glued each of his six eyes to the lenses of the cosmoscope. His nasal tentacles were orangewith fear, and his antennae buzzed hoarsely as he dictated his report to the operator behind him.“It has come!” he cried. “That blur in the ether can be nothing less than a fleetfrom outside the space-time continuum we know. Nothing like this has ever appeared before. It mustbe an enemy. Give the alarm to the Inter-Cosmic Chamber of Commerce. There’s no time tolose—at this rate they’ll be upon us in less than six centuries. Hak Ni must have achance to get the fleet in action at once.”

[I glanced up from the Windy City Grab-Bag, which had beguiled my inactivepeace-time days in the Super-Galactic Patrol. The handsome young vegetable, with whom I shared mybowl of caterpillar custard since earliest infancy, and with whom I had been thrown out of everyjoint in the intra-dimensional city of Kastor-Ya,] had really a worried look upon his lavender face.After he had given the alarm we jumped on our ether-bikes and hastened across to the outer planeton which the Chamber held its sessions.

[Within the Great Council Chamber, which measured twenty-eight square feet (withquite a high ceiling), were gathered delegates from all the thirty-seven galaxies of our immediateuniverse. Oll Stof, President of the Chamber and representative of the Milliner’s Soviet,raised his eyeless snout with dignity] and prepared to address the assembled multitude. He was ahighly developed protozoan organism from Nov-Kas, and spoke by emitting alternate waves of heat andcold.

[“Gentlemen,” he radiated, “a terrible peril has come upon us whichI feel I must bring to your attention.”

Everybody applauded riotously, as a wave of excitement rippled through thevariegated audience; those who were handless slithering their tentacles together.

He continued: “Hak Ni, crawl upon the dais!”

There was a thunderous silence, during which a faint prompting was heard] from thedizzy summit of the platform. [Hak Ni, the yellow-furred and valorous commander of our ranksthrough numerous installments, ascended to the towering peak inches above the floor.

“My friends—” he began, with an eloquent scraping of his posteriorlimbs, “these treasured walls and pillars shall not mourn on my account....” At thispoint, one of his numerous relatives cheered. “Well do I remember when...”

Oll Stof interrupted him.] “You have anticipated my thoughts and orders. Goforth and win for dear old Inter-Cosmic.”

[Two paragraphs later found us soaring out past innumerable stars toward where afaint blur half a million light-years long marked the presence of the hated enemy, whom we had notseen. What monsters of malformed grotesqueness seethed out there among the moons of infinity, wereally didn’t know, but there was a malign menace in the glow that steadily increased until itspanned the entire heavens. Very soon we made out separate objects in the blur. Before all myhorror-stricken vision-areas there spread an endless array of scissors-shaped space-ships oftotally unfamiliar form.

Then from the direction of the enemy there came a terrifying sound, which I soonrecognised as a hail and a challenge. An answering thrill crept through me as I met with upliftedantennae this threat of battle with a monstrous intrusion upon our fair system from unknown outsideabysses.]

At the sound, [which was something like that of a rusty sewing-machine, only morehorrible,] Hak Ni too raised his snout in defiance, radiating a masterful order to the captains ofthe fleet. Instantly the huge space-ships swung into battle formation, with only a hundred or twoof them many light-years out of line.
