I saw him on a sleepless night when I was walking desperately to save my soul and my vision.My coming to New York had been a mistake; for whereas I had looked for poignant wonder and inspirationin the teeming labyrinths of ancient streets that twist endlessly from forgotten courts andsquares and waterfronts to courts and squares and waterfronts equally forgotten, and in theCyclopean modern towers and pinnacles that rise blackly Babylonian under waning moons, I hadfound instead only a sense of horror and oppression which threatened to master, paralyse, andannihilate me.

The disillusion had been gradual. Coming for the first time upon the town,I had seen it in the sunset from a bridge, majestic above its waters, its incredible peaks andpyramids rising flower-like and delicate from pools of violet mist to play with the flaminggolden clouds and the first stars of evening. Then it had lighted up window by window abovethe shimmering tides where lanterns nodded and glided and deep horns bayed weird harmonies,and itself become a starry firmament of dream, redolent of faery music, and one with the marvelsof Carcassonne and Samarcand and El Dorado and all glorious and half-fabulous cities. Shortlyafterward I was taken through those antique ways so dear to my fancy—narrow, curving alleysand passages where rows of red Georgian brick blinked with small-paned dormers above pillareddoorways that had looked on gilded sedans and panelled coaches—and in the first flushof realisation of these long-wished things I thought I had indeed achieved such treasures aswould make me in time a poet.

But success and happiness were not to be. Garish daylight shewed only squalorand alienage and the noxious elephantiasis of climbing, spreading stone where the moon had hintedof loveliness and elder magic; and the throngs of people that seethed through the flume-likestreets were squat, swarthy strangers with hardened faces and narrow eyes, shrewd strangerswithout dreams and without kinship to the scenes about them, who could never mean aught to ablue-eyed man of the old folk, with the love of fair green lanes and white New England villagesteeples in his heart.

So instead of the poems I had hoped for, there came only a shuddering blanknessand ineffable loneliness; and I saw at last a fearful truth which no one had ever dared to breathebefore—the unwhisperable secret of secrets—the fact that this city of stone andstridor is not a sentient perpetuation of Old New York as London is of Old London and Parisof Old Paris, but that it is in fact quite dead, its sprawling body imperfectly embalmed andinfested with queer animate things which have nothing to do with it as it was in life. Uponmaking this discovery I ceased to sleep comfortably; though something of resigned tranquillitycame back as I gradually formed the habit of keeping off the streets by day and venturing abroadonly at night, when darkness calls forth what little of the past still hovers wraith-like about,and old white doorways remember the stalwart forms that once passed through them. With thismode of relief I even wrote a few poems, and still refrained from going home to my people lestI seem to crawl back ignobly in defeat.

Then, on a sleepless night’s walk, I met the man. It was in a grotesquehidden courtyard of the Greenwich section, for there in my ignorance I had settled, having heardof the place as the natural home of poets and artists. The archaic lanes and houses and unexpectedbits of square and court had indeed delighted me, and when I found the poets and artists tobe loud-voiced pretenders whose quaintness is tinsel and whose lives are a denial of all thatpure beauty which is poetry and art, I stayed on for love of these venerable things. I fanciedthem as they were in their prime, when Greenwich was a placid village not yet engulfed by thetown; and in the hours before dawn, when all the revellers had slunk away, I used to wanderalone among their cryptical windings and brood upon the curious arcana which generations musthave deposited there. This kept my soul alive, and gave me a few of those dreams and visionsfor which the poet far within me cried out.

The man came upon me at about two one cloudy August morning, as I was threadinga series of detached courtyards; now accessible only through the unlighted hallways of interveningbuildings, but once forming parts of a continuous network of picturesque alleys. I had heardof them by vague rumour, and realised that they could not be upon any map of today; but thefact that they were forgotten only endeared them to me, so that I had sought them with twicemy usual eagerness. Now that I had found them, my eagerness was again redoubled; for somethingin their arrangement dimly hinted that they might be only a few of many such, with dark, dumbcounterparts wedged obscurely betwixt high blank walls and deserted rear tenements, or lurkinglamplessly behind archways, unbetrayed by hordes of the foreign-speaking or guarded by furtiveand uncommunicative artists whose practices do not invite publicity or the light of day.

He spoke to me without invitation, noting my mood and glances as I studiedcertain knockered doorways above iron-railed steps, the pallid glow of traceried transoms feeblylighting my face. His own face was in shadow, and he wore a wide-brimmed hat which somehow blendedperfectly with the out-of-date cloak he affected; but I was subtly disquieted even before headdressed me. His form was very slight, thin almost to cadaverousness; and his voice provedphenomenally soft and hollow, though not particularly deep. He had, he said, noticed me severaltimes at my wanderings; and inferred that I resembled him in loving the vestiges of former years.Would I not like the guidance of one long practiced in these explorations, and possessed oflocal information profoundly deeper than any which an obvious newcomer could possibly have gained?

As he spoke, I caught a glimpse of his face in the yellow beam from a solitaryattic window. It was a noble, even a handsome, elderly countenance; and bore the marks of alineage and refinement unusual for the age and place. Yet some quality about it disturbed mealmost as much as its features pleased me—perhaps it was too white, or too expressionless,or too much out of keeping with the locality, to make me feel easy or comfortable. NeverthelessI followed him; for in those dreary days my quest for antique beauty and mystery was all thatI had to keep my soul alive, and I reckoned it a rare favour of Fate to fall in with one whosekindred seekings seemed to have penetrated so much farther than mine.

Something in the night constrained the cloaked man to silence, and for a longhour he led me forward without needless words; making only the briefest of comments concerningancient names and dates and changes, and directing my progress very largely by gestures as wesqueezed through interstices, tiptoed through corridors, clambered over brick walls, and oncecrawled on hands and knees through a low, arched passage of stone whose immense length and tortuoustwistings effaced at last every hint of geographical location I had managed to preserve. Thethings we saw were very old and marvellous, or at least they seemed so in the few stragglingrays of light by which I viewed them, and I shall never forget the tottering Ionic columns andfluted pilasters and urn-headed iron fence-posts and flaring-lintelled windows and decorativefanlights that appeared to grow quainter and stranger the deeper we advanced into this inexhaustiblemaze of unknown antiquity.

We met no person, and as time passed the lighted windows became fewer and fewer.The street-lights we first encountered had been of oil, and of the ancient lozenge pattern.Later I noticed some with candles; and at last, after traversing a horrible unlighted courtwhere my guide had to lead with his gloved hand through total blackness to a narrow wooden gatein a high wall, we came upon a fragment of alley lit only by lanterns in front of every seventhhouse—unbelievably colonial tin lanterns with conical tops and holes punched in the sides.This alley led steeply uphill—more steeply than I thought possible in this part of NewYork—and the upper end was blocked squarely by the ivy-clad wall of a private estate,beyond which I could see a pale cupola, and the tops of trees waving against a vague lightnessin the sky. In this wall was a small, low-arched gate of nail-studded black oak, which the manproceeded to unlock with a ponderous key. Leading me within, he steered a course in utter blacknessover what seemed to be a gravel path, and finally up a flight of stone steps to the door ofthe house, which he unlocked and opened for me.

We entered, and as we did so I grew faint from a reek of infinite mustinesswhich welled out to meet us, and which must have been the fruit of unwholesome centuries ofdecay. My host appeared not to notice this, and in courtesy I kept silent as he piloted me upa curving stairway, across a hall, and into a room whose door I heard him lock behind us. ThenI saw him pull the curtains of the three small-paned windows that barely shewed themselves againstthe lightening sky; after which he crossed to the mantel, struck flint and steel, lighted twocandles of a candelabrum of twelve sconces, and made a gesture enjoining soft-toned speech.

In this feeble radiance I saw that we were in a spacious, well-furnished, andpanelled library dating from the first quarter of the eighteenth century, with splendid doorwaypediments, a delightful Doric cornice, and a magnificently carved overmantel with scroll-and-urntop. Above the crowded bookshelves at intervals along the walls were well-wrought family portraits;all tarnished to an enigmatical dimness, and bearing an unmistakable likeness to the man whonow motioned me to a chair beside the graceful Chippendale table. Before seating himself acrossthe table from me, my host paused for a moment as if in embarrassment; then, tardily removinghis gloves, wide-brimmed hat, and cloak, stood theatrically revealed in full mid-Georgian costumefrom queued hair and neck ruffles to knee-breeches, silk hose, and the buckled shoes I had notpreviously noticed. Now slowly sinking into a lyre-back chair, he commenced to eye me intently.

Without his hat he took on an aspect of extreme age which was scarcely visiblebefore, and I wondered if this unperceived mark of singular longevity were not one of the sourcesof my original disquiet. When he spoke at length, his soft, hollow, and carefully muffled voicenot infrequently quavered; and now and then I had great difficulty in following him as I listenedwith a thrill of amazement and half-disavowed alarm which grew each instant.

“You behold, Sir,” my host began, “a man of very eccentricalhabits, for whose costume no apology need be offered to one with your wit and inclinations.Reflecting upon better times, I have not scrupled to ascertain their ways and adopt their dressand manners; an indulgence which offends none if practiced without ostentation. It hath beenmy good-fortune to retain the rural seat of my ancestors, swallowed though it was by two towns,first Greenwich, which built up hither after 1800, then New-York, which joined on near 1830.There were many reasons for the close keeping of this place in my family, and I have not beenremiss in discharging such obligations. The squire who succeeded to it in 1768 studied sartainarts and made sartain discoveries, all connected with influences residing in this particularplot of ground, and eminently desarving of the strongest guarding. Some curious effects of thesearts and discoveries I now purpose to shew you, under the strictest secrecy; and I believe Imay rely on my judgment of men enough to have no distrust of either your interest or your fidelity.”

He paused, but I could only nod my head. I have said that I was alarmed, yetto my soul nothing was more deadly than the material daylight world of New York, and whetherthis man were a harmless eccentric or a wielder of dangerous arts I had no choice save to followhim and slake my sense of wonder on whatever he might have to offer. So I listened.

“To—my ancestor—” he softly continued, “thereappeared to reside some very remarkable qualities in the will of mankind; qualities having alittle-suspected dominance not only over the acts of one’s self and of others, but overevery variety of force and substance in Nature, and over many elements and dimensions deemedmore univarsal than Nature herself. May I say that he flouted the sanctity of things as greatas space and time, and that he put to strange uses the rites of sartain half-breed red Indiansonce encamped upon this hill? These Indians shewed choler when the place was built, and wereplaguy pestilent in asking to visit the grounds at the full of the moon. For years they stoleover the wall each month when they could, and by stealth performed sartain acts. Then, in ’68,the new squire catched them at their doings, and stood still at what he saw. Thereafter he bargainedwith them and exchanged the free access of his grounds for the exact inwardness of what theydid; larning that their grandfathers got part of their custom from red ancestors and part froman old Dutchman in the time of the States-General. And pox on him, I’m afeared the squiremust have sarved them monstrous bad rum—whether or not by intent—for a week afterhe larnt the secret he was the only man living that knew it. You, Sir, are the first outsiderto be told there is a secret, and split me if I’d have risked tampering that much with—thepowers—had ye not been so hot after bygone things.”

I shuddered as the man grew colloquial—and with familiar speech of anotherday. He went on.

“But you must know, Sir, that what—the squire—got from thosemongrel salvages was but a small part of the larning he came to have. He had not been at Oxfordfor nothing, nor talked to no account with an ancient chymist and astrologer in Paris. He was,in fine, made sensible that all the world is but the smoke of our intellects; past the biddingof the vulgar, but by the wise to be puffed out and drawn in like any cloud of prime Virginiatobacco. What we want, we may make about us; and what we don’t want, we may sweep away.I won’t say that all this is wholly true in body, but ’tis sufficient true to furnisha very pretty spectacle now and then. You, I conceive, would be tickled by a better sight ofsartain other years than your fancy affords you; so be pleased to hold back any fright at whatI design to shew. Come to the window and be quiet.”

My host now took my hand to draw me to one of the two windows on the long sideof the malodorous room, and at the first touch of his ungloved fingers I turned cold. His flesh,though dry and firm, was of the quality of ice; and I almost shrank away from his pulling. Butagain I thought of the emptiness and horror of reality, and boldly prepared to follow whithersoeverI might be led. Once at the window, the man drew apart the yellow silk curtains and directedmy stare into the blackness outside. For a moment I saw nothing save a myriad of tiny dancinglights, far, far before me. Then, as if in response to an insidious motion of my host’shand, a flash of heat-lightning played over the scene, and I looked out upon a sea of luxuriantfoliage—foliage unpolluted, and not the sea of roofs to be expected by any normal mind.On my right the Hudson glittered wickedly, and in the distance ahead I saw the unhealthy shimmerof a vast salt marsh constellated with nervous fireflies. The flash died, and an evil smileillumined the waxy face of the aged necromancer.

“That was before my time—before the new squire’s time. Praylet us try again.”

I was faint, even fainter than the hateful modernity of that accursed cityhad made me.

“Good God!” I whispered, “can you do that for any time?”And as he nodded, and bared the black stumps of what had once been yellow fangs, I clutchedat the curtains to prevent myself from falling. But he steadied me with that terrible, ice-coldclaw, and once more made his insidious gesture.

Again the lightning flashed—but this time upon a scene not wholly strange.It was Greenwich, the Greenwich that used to be, with here and there a roof or row of housesas we see it now, yet with lovely green lanes and fields and bits of grassy common. The marshstill glittered beyond, but in the farther distance I saw the steeples of what was then allof New York; Trinity and St. Paul’s and the Brick Church dominating their sisters, anda faint haze of wood smoke hovering over the whole. I breathed hard, but not so much from thesight itself as from the possibilities my imagination terrifiedly conjured up.

“Can you—dare you—go far?” I spoke with awe,and I think he shared it for a second, but the evil grin returned.

“Far? What I have seen would blast ye to a mad statue of stone!Back, back—forward, forward—look, ye puling lack-wit!”

And as he snarled the phrase under his breath he gestured anew; bringing tothe sky a flash more blinding than either which had come before. For full three seconds I couldglimpse that pandaemoniac sight, and in those seconds I saw a vista which will ever afterwardtorment me in dreams. I saw the heavens verminous with strange flying things, and beneath thema hellish black city of giant stone terraces with impious pyramids flung savagely to the moon,and devil-lights burning from unnumbered windows. And swarming loathsomely on aërial galleriesI saw the yellow, squint-eyed people of that city, robed horribly in orange and red, and dancinginsanely to the pounding of fevered kettle-drums, the clatter of obscene crotala, and the maniacalmoaning of muted horns whose ceaseless dirges rose and fell undulantly like the waves of anunhallowed ocean of bitumen.

I saw this vista, I say, and heard as with the mind’s ear the blasphemousdomdaniel of cacophony which companioned it. It was the shrieking fulfilment of all the horrorwhich that corpse-city had ever stirred in my soul, and forgetting every injunction to silenceI screamed and screamed and screamed as my nerves gave way and the walls quivered about me.

Then, as the flash subsided, I saw that my host was trembling too; a look ofshocking fear half blotting from his face the serpent distortion of rage which my screams hadexcited. He tottered, clutched at the curtains as I had done before, and wriggled his head wildly,like a hunted animal. God knows he had cause, for as the echoes of my screaming died away therecame another sound so hellishly suggestive that only numbed emotion kept me sane and conscious.It was the steady, stealthy creaking of the stairs beyond the locked door, as with the ascentof a barefoot or skin-shod horde; and at last the cautious, purposeful rattling of the brasslatch that glowed in the feeble candlelight. The old man clawed and spat at me through the mouldyair, and barked things in his throat as he swayed with the yellow curtain he clutched.

“The full moon—damn ye—ye&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ye yelpingdog—ye called ’em, and they’ve come for me! Moccasined feet—dead men—Gadsink ye, ye red devils, but I poisoned no rum o’ yours—han’t I kept your pox-rottedmagic safe?—ye swilled yourselves sick, curse ye, and ye must needs blame the squire—letgo, you! Unhand that latch—I’ve naught for ye here—”

At this point three slow and very deliberate raps shook the panels of the door,and a white foam gathered at the mouth of the frantic magician. His fright, turning to steelydespair, left room for a resurgence of his rage against me; and he staggered a step toward thetable on whose edge I was steadying myself. The curtains, still clutched in his right hand ashis left clawed out at me, grew taut and finally crashed down from their lofty fastenings; admittingto the room a flood of that full moonlight which the brightening of the sky had presaged. Inthose greenish beams the candles paled, and a new semblance of decay spread over the musk-reekingroom with its wormy panelling, sagging floor, battered mantel, rickety furniture, and raggeddraperies. It spread over the old man, too, whether from the same source or because of his fearand vehemence, and I saw him shrivel and blacken as he lurched near and strove to rend me withvulturine talons. Only his eyes stayed whole, and they glared with a propulsive, dilated incandescencewhich grew as the face around them charred and dwindled.

The rapping was now repeated with greater insistence, and this time bore ahint of metal. The black thing facing me had become only a head with eyes, impotently tryingto wriggle across the sinking floor in my direction, and occasionally emitting feeble littlespits of immortal malice. Now swift and splintering blows assailed the sickly panels, and Isaw the gleam of a tomahawk as it cleft the rending wood. I did not move, for I could not; butwatched dazedly as the door fell in pieces to admit a colossal, shapeless influx of inky substancestarred with shining, malevolent eyes. It poured thickly, like a flood of oil bursting a rottenbulkhead, overturned a chair as it spread, and finally flowed under the table and across theroom to where the blackened head with the eyes still glared at me. Around that head it closed,totally swallowing it up, and in another moment it had begun to recede; bearing away its invisibleburden without touching me, and flowing again out of that black doorway and down the unseenstairs, which creaked as before, though in reverse order.

Then the floor gave way at last, and I slid gaspingly down into the nightedchamber below, choking with cobwebs and half swooning with terror. The green moon, shining throughbroken windows, shewed me the hall door half open; and as I rose from the plaster-strown floorand twisted myself free from the sagged ceilings, I saw sweep past it an awful torrent of blackness,with scores of baleful eyes glowing in it. It was seeking the door to the cellar, and when itfound it, it vanished therein. I now felt the floor of this lower room giving as that of theupper chamber had done, and once a crashing above had been followed by the fall past the westwindow of something which must have been the cupola. Now liberated for the instant from thewreckage, I rushed through the hall to the front door; and finding myself unable to open it,seized a chair and broke a window, climbing frenziedly out upon the unkempt lawn where moonlightdanced over yard-high grass and weeds. The wall was high, and all the gates were locked; butmoving a pile of boxes in a corner I managed to gain the top and cling to the great stone urnset there.

About me in my exhaustion I could see only strange walls and windows and oldgambrel roofs. The steep street of my approach was nowhere visible, and the little I did seesuccumbed rapidly to a mist that rolled in from the river despite the glaring moonlight. Suddenlythe urn to which I clung began to tremble, as if sharing my own lethal dizziness; and in anotherinstant my body was plunging downward to I knew not what fate.

The man who found me said that I must have crawled a long way despite my brokenbones, for a trail of blood stretched off as far as he dared look. The gathering rain soon effacedthis link with the scene of my ordeal, and reports could state no more than that I had appearedfrom a place unknown, at the entrance of a little black court off Perry Street.

I never sought to return to those tenebrous labyrinths, nor would I directany sane man thither if I could. Of who or what that ancient creature was, I have no idea; butI repeat that the city is dead and full of unsuspected horrors. Whither he has gone,I do not know; but I have gone home to the pure New England lanes up which fragrant sea-windssweep at evening.
