Original title Al Azif—azif being the word used by Arabs to designate that nocturnalsound (made by insects) suppos’d to be the howling of daemons.

Composed by Abdul Alhazred, a mad poet of Sanaá, in Yemen, who is said tohave flourished during the period of the Ommiade caliphs, circa 700 A.D.  He visited the ruins ofBabylon and the subterranean secrets of Memphis and spent ten years alone in the great southerndesert of Arabia—the Roba el Khaliyeh or “Empty Space” of the ancients—and“Dahna” or “Crimson” desert of the modern Arabs, which is held to be inhabitedby protective evil spirits and monsters of death.  Of this desert many strange and unbelievablemarvels are told by those who pretend to have penetrated it.  In his last years Alhazred dwelt inDamascus, where the Necronomicon (Al Azif) was written, and of his final death ordisappearance (738 A.D.) many terrible and conflicting things are told.  He is said by EbnKhallikan (12th cent. biographer) to have been seized by an invisible monster in broad daylight anddevoured horribly before a large number of fright-frozen witnesses. Of his madness many things aretold.  He claimed to have seen fabulous Irem, or City of Pillars, and to have found beneath theruins of a certain nameless desert town the shocking annals and secrets of a race older thanmankind.  He was only an indifferent Moslem, worshipping unknown entities whom he calledYog-Sothoth and Cthulhu.

In A.D. 950 the Azif, which had gained a considerable tho’surreptitious circulation amongst the philosophers of the age, was secretly translated into Greekby Theodorus Philetas of Constantinople under the title Necronomicon.  For a century itimpelled certain experimenters to terrible attempts, when it was suppressed and burnt by thepatriarch Michael. After this it is only heard of furtively, but (1228) Olaus Wormius made a Latintranslation later in the Middle Ages, and the Latin text was printed twice—once in thefifteenth century in black-letter (evidently in Germany) and once in the seventeenth (prob.Spanish)—both editions being without identifying marks, and located as to time and place byinternal typographical evidence only. The work both Latin and Greek was banned by Pope Gregory IXin 1232, shortly after its Latin translation, which called attention to it. The Arabic original waslost as early as Wormius’ time, as indicated by his prefatory note;  and no sight of the Greekcopy—which was printed in Italy between 1500 and 1550—has been reported since the burningof a certain Salem man’s library in 1692. An English translation made by Dr. Dee was neverprinted, and exists only in fragments recovered from the original manuscript.  Of the Latin textsnow existing one (15th cent.) is known to be in the British Museum under lock and key, whileanother (17th cent.) is in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris. A seventeenth-century editionis in the Widener Library at Harvard, and in the library of Miskatonic University at Arkham.  Alsoin the library of the University of Buenos Ayres.  Numerous other copies probably exist in secret,and a fifteenth-century one is persistently rumoured to form part of the collection of a celebratedAmerican millionaire.  A still vaguer rumour credits the preservation of a sixteenth-century Greektext in the Salem family of Pickman; but if it was so preserved, it vanished with the artist R.U.Pickman, who disappeared early in 1926.  The book is rigidly suppressed by the authorities of mostcountries, and by all branches of organised ecclesiasticism.  Reading leads to terribleconsequences.  It was from rumours of this book (of which relatively few of the general publicknow) that R.W. Chambers is said to have derived the idea of his early novel The King inYellow.

Chronology

Al Azif written circa 730 A.D. at Damascus by Abdul Alhazred

Tr. to Greek 950 A.D. asNecronomicon by Theodorus Philetas

Burnt by Patriarch Michael 1050 (i.e., Greek text).Arabic text now lost.

Olaus translates Gr. to Latin 1228

1232 Latin ed. (and Gr.) suppr. byPope Gregory IX

14... Black-letter printed edition (Germany)

15... Gr. text printed inItaly

16... Spanish reprint of Latin text
