(“.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;asIbid says in his famous Lives of the Poets.”—From a studenttheme.)

The erroneous idea that Ibid is the author of the Lives is so frequently met with, evenamong those pretending to a degree of culture, that it is worth correcting. It should be a matterof general knowledge that Cf. is responsible for this work. Ibid’s masterpiece, on theother hand, was the famous Op. Cit. wherein all the significant undercurrents of Graeco-Romanexpression were crystallised once for all—and with admirable acuteness, notwithstandingthe surprisingly late date at which Ibid wrote. There is a false report—very commonlyreproduced in modern books prior to Von Schweinkopf’s monumental Geschichte der Ostrogothenin Italien—that Ibid was a Romanised Visigoth of Ataulf’s horde who settledin Placentia about 410 A.D. The contrary cannot be too strongly emphasised; for Von Schweinkopf,and since his time Littlewit1 and Bêtenoir,2have shewn with irrefutable force that this strikingly isolated figure was a genuine Roman—orat least as genuine a Roman as that degenerate and mongrelised age could produce—of whomone might well say what Gibbon said of Boethius, “that he was the last whom Cato or Tullycould have acknowledged for their countryman.” He was, like Boethius and nearly all theeminent men of his age, of the great Anician family, and traced his genealogy with much exactitudeand self-satisfaction to all the heroes of the republic. His full name—long and pompousaccording to the custom of an age which had lost the trinomial simplicity of classic Roman nomenclature—isstated by Von Schweinkopf3 to have been Caius Anicius MagnusFurius Camillus Æmilianus Cornelius Valerius Pompeius Julius Ibidus; though Littlewit4 rejects Æmilianus and adds Claudius Decius Junianus;whilst Bêtenoir5 differs radically, giving the fullname as Magnus Furius Camillus Aurelius Antoninus Flavius Anicius Petronius Valentinianus AegidusIbidus.

The eminent critic and biographer was born in the year 486, shortly after theextinction of the Roman rule in Gaul by Clovis. Rome and Ravenna are rivals for the honour ofhis birth, though it is certain that he received his rhetorical and philosophical training inthe schools of Athens—the extent of whose suppression by Theodosius a century before isgrossly exaggerated by the superficial. In 512, under the benign rule of the Ostrogoth Theodoric,we behold him as a teacher of rhetoric at Rome, and in 516 he held the consulship together withPompilius Numantius Bombastes Marcellinus Deodamnatus. Upon the death of Theodoric in 526, Ibidusretired from public life to compose his celebrated work (whose pure Ciceronian style is as remarkablea case of classic atavism as is the verse of Claudius Claudianus, who flourished a century beforeIbidus); but he was later recalled to scenes of pomp to act as court rhetorician for Theodatus,nephew of Theodoric.

Upon the usurpation of Vitiges, Ibidus fell into disgrace and was for a timeimprisoned; but the coming of the Byzantine-Roman army under Belisarius soon restored him toliberty and honours. Throughout the siege of Rome he served bravely in the army of the defenders,and afterward followed the eagles of Belisarius to Alba, Porto, and Centumcellae. After theFrankish siege of Milan, Ibidus was chosen to accompany the learned Bishop Datius to Greece,and resided with him at Corinth in the year 539. About 541 he removed to Constantinopolis, wherehe received every mark of imperial favour both from Justinianus and Justinus the Second. TheEmperors Tiberius and Maurice did kindly honour to his old age, and contributed much to hisimmortality—especially Maurice, whose delight it was to trace his ancestry to old Romenotwithstanding his birth at Arabiscus, in Cappadocia. It was Maurice who, in the poet’s101st year, secured the adoption of his work as a textbook in the schools of the empire, anhonour which proved a fatal tax on the aged rhetorician’s emotions, since he passed awaypeacefully at his home near the church of St. Sophia on the sixth day before the Kalends ofSeptember, A.D. 587, in the 102nd year of his age.

His remains, notwithstanding the troubled state of Italy, were taken to Ravennafor interment; but being interred in the suburb of Classe, were exhumed and ridiculed by theLombard Duke of Spoleto, who took his skull to King Autharis for use as a wassail-bowl. Ibid’sskull was proudly handed down from king to king of the Lombard line. Upon the capture of Paviaby Charlemagne in 774, the skull was seized from the tottering Desiderius and carried in thetrain of the Frankish conqueror. It was from this vessel, indeed, that Pope Leo administeredthe royal unction which made of the hero-nomad a Holy Roman Emperor. Charlemagne took Ibid’sskull to his capital at Aix, soon afterward presenting it to his Saxon teacher Alcuin, uponwhose death in 804 it was sent to Alcuin’s kinsfolk in England.

William the Conqueror, finding it in an abbey niche where the pious familyof Alcuin had placed it (believing it to be the skull of a saint6who had miraculously annihilated the Lombards by his prayers), did reverence to its osseousantiquity; and even the rough soldiers of Cromwell, upon destroying Ballylough Abbey in Irelandin 1650 (it having been secretly transported thither by a devout Papist in 1539, upon HenryVIII’s dissolution of the English monasteries), declined to offer violence to a relicso venerable.

It was captured by the private soldier Read-’em-and-Weep Hopkins, whonot long after traded it to Rest-in-Jehovah Stubbs for a quid of new Virginia weed. Stubbs,upon sending forth his son Zerubbabel to seek his fortune in New England in 1661 (for he thoughtill of the Restoration atmosphere for a pious young yeoman), gave him St. Ibid’s—orrather Brother Ibid’s, for he abhorred all that was Popish—skull as a talisman.Upon landing in Salem Zerubbabel set it up in his cupboard beside the chimney, he having builta modest house near the town pump. However, he had not been wholly unaffected by the Restorationinfluence; and having become addicted to gaming, lost the skull to one Epenetus Dexter, a visitingfreeman of Providence.

It was in the house of Dexter, in the northern part of the town near the presentintersection of North Main and Olney Streets, on the occasion of Canonchet’s raid of March30, 1676, during King Philip’s War; and the astute sachem, recognising it at once as athing of singular venerableness and dignity, sent it as a symbol of alliance to a faction ofthe Pequots in Connecticut with whom he was negotiating. On April 4 he was captured by the colonistsand soon after executed, but the austere head of Ibid continued on its wanderings.

The Pequots, enfeebled by a previous war, could give the now stricken Narragansettsno assistance; and in 1680 a Dutch fur-trader of Albany, Petrus van Schaack, secured the distinguishedcranium for the modest sum of two guilders, he having recognised its value from the half-effacedinscription carved in Lombardic minuscules (palaeography, it might be explained, was one ofthe leading accomplishments of New-Netherland fur-traders of the seventeenth century).



From van Schaack, sad to say, the relic was stolen in 1683 by a French trader,Jean Grenier, whose Popish zeal recognised the features of one whom he had been taught at hismother’s knee to revere as St. Ibide. Grenier, fired with virtuous rage at the possessionof this holy symbol by a Protestant, crushed van Schaack’s head one night with an axeand escaped to the north with his booty; soon, however, being robbed and slain by the half-breedvoyageur Michel Savard, who took the skull—despite the illiteracy which prevented hisrecognising it—to add to a collection of similar but more recent material.

Upon his death in 1701 his half-breed son Pierre traded it among other thingsto some emissaries of the Sacs and Foxes, and it was found outside the chief’s tepee ageneration later by Charles de Langlade, founder of the trading post at Green Bay, Wisconsin.De Langlade regarded this sacred object with proper veneration and ransomed it at the expenseof many glass beads; yet after his time it found itself in many other hands, being traded tosettlements at the head of Lake Winnebago, to tribes around Lake Mendota, and finally, earlyin the nineteenth century, to one Solomon Juneau, a Frenchman, at the new trading post of Milwaukeeon the Menominee River and the shore of Lake Michigan.

Later traded to Jacques Caboche, another settler, it was in 1850 lost in agame of chess or poker to a newcomer named Hans Zimmerman; being used by him as a beer-steinuntil one day, under the spell of its contents, he suffered it to roll from his front stoopto the prairie path before his home—where, falling into the burrow of a prairie-dog, itpassed beyond his power of discovery or recovery upon his awaking.

So for generations did the sainted skull of Caius Anicius Magnus Furius CamillusÆmilianus Cornelius Valerius Pompeius Julius Ibidus, consul of Rome, favourite of emperors,and saint of the Romish church, lie hidden beneath the soil of a growing town. At first worshippedwith dark rites by the prairie-dogs, who saw in it a deity sent from the upper world, it afterwardfell into dire neglect as the race of simple, artless burrowers succumbed before the onslaughtof the conquering Aryan. Sewers came, but they passed by it. Houses went up—2303 of them,and more—and at last one fateful night a titan thing occurred. Subtle Nature, convulsedwith a spiritual ecstasy, like the froth of that region’s quondam beverage, laid low thelofty and heaved high the humble—and behold! In the roseal dawn the burghers of Milwaukeerose to find a former prairie turned to a highland! Vast and far-reaching was the great upheaval.Subterrene arcana, hidden for years, came at last to the light. For there, full in the riftedroadway, lay bleached and tranquil in bland, saintly, and consular pomp the dome-like skullof Ibid!

[NOTES]

1 Rome and Byzantium: A Study in Survival(Waukesha, 1869), Vol. XX, p. 598.

2 Influences Romains dans le Moyen Age(Fond du Lac, 1877), Vol. XV, p. 720.

3 Following Procopius, Goth. x.y.z.

4 Following Jornandes, Codex Murat. xxj.4144.

5 After Pagi, 50–50.

6 Not till the appearance of von Schweinkopf’swork in 1797 were St. Ibid and the rhetorician properly re-identified.
