I.

The drive toward Cape Girardeau had been through unfamiliar country; and as the late afternoonlight grew golden and half-dreamlike I realised that I must have directions if I expected toreach the town before night. I did not care to be wandering about these bleak southern Missourilowlands after dark, for roads were poor and the November cold rather formidable in an openroadster. Black clouds, too, were massing on the horizon; so I looked about among the long,grey and blue shadows that streaked the flat, brownish fields, hoping to glimpse some housewhere I might get the needed information.

It was a lonely and deserted country, but at last I spied a roof among a clumpof trees near the small river on my right; perhaps a full half-mile from the road, and probablyreachable by some path or drive which I would presently come upon. In the absence of any nearerdwelling, I resolved to try my luck there; and was glad when the bushes by the roadside revealedthe ruin of a carved stone gateway, covered with dry, dead vines and choked with undergrowthwhich explained why I had not been able to trace the path across the fields in my first distantview. I saw that I could not drive the car in, so I parked it very carefully near the gate—wherea thick evergreen would shield it in case of rain—and got out for the long walk to thehouse.

Traversing that brush-grown path in the gathering twilight I was consciousof a distinct sense of foreboding, probably induced by the air of sinister decay hovering aboutthe gate and the former driveway. From the carvings on the old stone pillars I inferred thatthis place was once an estate of manorial dignity; and I could clearly see that the drivewayhad originally boasted guardian lines of linden trees, some of which had died, while othershad lost their special identity among the wild scrub growths of the region.

As I ploughed onward, cockleburrs and stickers clung to my clothes, and I beganto wonder whether the place could be inhabited after all. Was I tramping on a vain errand? Fora moment I was tempted to go back and try some farm farther along the road, when a view of thehouse ahead aroused my curiosity and stimulated my venturesome spirit.

There was something provocatively fascinating in the tree-girt, decrepit pilebefore me, for it spoke of the graces and spaciousness of a bygone era and a far more southerlyenvironment. It was a typical wooden plantation house of the classic, early nineteenth-centurypattern, with two and a half stories and a great Ionic portico whose pillars reached up as faras the attic and supported a triangular pediment. Its state of decay was extreme and obvious;one of the vast columns having rotted and fallen to the ground, while the upper piazza or balconyhad sagged dangerously low. Other buildings, I judged, had formerly stood near it.

As I mounted the broad stone steps to the low porch and the carved and fanlighteddoorway I felt distinctly nervous, and started to light a cigarette—desisting when I sawhow dry and inflammable everything about me was. Though now convinced that the house was deserted,I nevertheless hesitated to violate its dignity without knocking; so tugged at the rusty ironknocker until I could get it to move, and finally set up a cautious rapping which seemed tomake the whole place shake and rattle. There was no response, yet once more I plied the cumbrous,creaking device—as much to dispel the sense of unholy silence and solitude as to arouseany possible occupant of the ruin.

Somewhere near the river I heard the mournful note of a dove, and it seemedas if the coursing water itself were faintly audible. Half in a dream, I seized and rattledthe ancient latch, and finally gave the great six-panelled door a frank trying. It was unlocked,as I could see in a moment; and though it stuck and grated on its hinges I began to push itopen, stepping through it into a vast shadowy hall as I did so.

But the moment I took this step I regretted it. It was not that a legion ofspectres confronted me in that dim and dusty hall with the ghostly Empire furniture; but thatI knew all at once that the place was not deserted at all. There was a creaking on the greatcurved staircase, and the sound of faltering footsteps slowly descending. Then I saw a tall,bent figure silhouetted for an instant against the great Palladian window on the landing.

My first start of terror was soon over, and as the figure descended the finalflight I was ready to greet the householder whose privacy I had invaded. In the semi-darknessI could see him reach in his pocket for a match. There came a flare as he lighted a small kerosenelamp which stood on a rickety console table near the foot of the stairs. In the feeble glowwas revealed the stooping figure of a very tall, emaciated old man; disordered as to dress andunshaved as to face, yet for all that with the bearing and expression of a gentleman.

I did not wait for him to speak, but at once began to explain my presence.

“You’ll pardon my coming in like this, but when my knocking didn’traise anybody I concluded that no one lived here. What I wanted originally was to know the rightroad to Cape Girardeau—the shortest road, that is. I wanted to get there before dark, butnow, of course—“

As I paused, the man spoke; in exactly the cultivated tone I had expected,and with a mellow accent as unmistakably Southern as the house he inhabited.

“Rather, you must pardon me for not answering your knock more promptly.I live in a very retired way, and am not usually expecting visitors. At first I thought youwere a mere curiosity-seeker. Then when you knocked again I started to answer, but I am notwell and have to move very slowly. Spinal neuritis—very troublesome case.

“But as for your getting to town before dark—it’s plain youcan’t do that. The road you are on—for I suppose you came from the gate—isn’tthe best or shortest way. What you must do is to take your first left after you leave the gate—thatis, the first real road to your left. There are three or four cart paths you can ignore, butyou can’t mistake the real road because of the extra large willow tree on the right justopposite it. Then when you’ve turned, keep on past two roads and turn to the right alongthe third. After that—“

Perplexed by these elaborate directions—confusing things indeed to a totalstranger—I could not help interrupting.

“Please wait a moment! How can I follow all these clues in pitch darkness,without ever having been near here before, and with only an indifferent pair of headlights totell me what is and what isn’t a road? Besides, I think it’s going to storm prettysoon, and my car is an open one. It looks as if I were in a bad fix if I want to get to CapeGirardeau tonight. The fact is, I don’t think I’d better try to make it. I don’tlike to impose burdens, or anything like that—but in view of the circumstances, do yousuppose you could put me up for the night? I won’t be any trouble—no meals or anything.Just let me have a corner to sleep in till daylight, and I’m all right. I can leave thecar in the road where it is—a bit of wet weather won’t hurt it if worst comes to worst.”

As I made my sudden request I could see the old man’s face lose its formerexpression of quiet resignation and take on an odd, surprised look.

“Sleep—here?”

He seemed so astonished at my request that I repeated it.

“Yes, why not? I assure you I won’t be any trouble. What else can I do? I’m a stranger hereabouts, these roads are a labyrinth in the dark, and I’llwager it’ll be raining torrents outside of an hour—“

This time it was my host’s turn to interrupt, and as he did so I couldfeel a peculiar quality in his deep, musical voice.

“A stranger—of course you must be, else you wouldn’t think ofsleeping here; wouldn’t think of coming here at all. People don’t come here nowadays.”

He paused, and my desire to stay was increased a thousandfold by the senseof mystery his laconic words seemed to evoke. There was surely something alluringly queer aboutthis place, and the pervasive musty smell seemed to cloak a thousand secrets. Again I noticedthe extreme decrepitude of everything about me; manifest even in the feeble rays of the singlesmall lamp. I felt woefully chilly, and saw with regret that no heating seemed to be provided;yet so great was my curiosity that I still wished most ardently to stay and learn somethingof the recluse and his dismal abode.

“Let that be as it may,” I replied. “I can’t help aboutother people. But I surely would like to have a spot to stop till daylight. Still—if peopledon’t relish this place, mayn’t it be because it’s getting so run-down? Of courseI suppose it would take a fortune to keep such an estate up, but if the burden’s too greatwhy don’t you look for smaller quarters? Why try to stick it out here in this way—withall the hardships and discomforts?”

The man did not seem offended, but answered me very gravely.

“Surely you may stay if you really wish to—you can come tono harm that I know of. But others claim there are certain peculiarly undesirable influenceshere. As for me—I stay here because I have to. There is something I feel it a duty to guard—somethingthat holds me. I wish I had the money and health and ambition to take decent care of the houseand grounds.”

With my curiosity still more heightened, I prepared to take my host at hisword; and followed him slowly upstairs when he motioned me to do so. It was very dark now, anda faint pattering outside told me that the threatened rain had come. I would have been gladof any shelter, but this was doubly welcome because of the hints of mystery about the placeand its master. For an incurable lover of the grotesque, no more fitting haven could have beenprovided.

II.

There was a second-floor corner room in less unkempt shape than the rest ofthe house, and into this my host led me; setting down his small lamp and lighting a somewhatlarger one. From the cleanliness and contents of the room, and from the books ranged along thewalls, I could see that I had not guessed amiss in thinking the man a gentleman of taste andbreeding. He was a hermit and eccentric, no doubt, but he still had standards and intellectualinterests. As he waved me to a seat I began a conversation on general topics, and was pleasedto find him not at all taciturn. If anything, he seemed glad of someone to talk to, and didnot even attempt to swerve the discourse from personal topics.

He was, I learned, one Antoine de Russy, of an ancient, powerful, and cultivatedline of Louisiana planters. More than a century ago his grandfather, a younger son, had migratedto southern Missouri and founded a new estate in the lavish ancestral manner; building thispillared mansion and surrounding it with all the accessories of a great plantation. There hadbeen, at one time, as many as 200 negroes in the cabins which stood on the flat ground in therear—ground that the river had now invaded—and to hear them singing and laughing andplaying the banjo at night was to know the fullest charm of a civilisation and social ordernow sadly extinct. In front of the house, where the great guardian oaks and willows stood, therehad been a lawn like a broad green carpet, always watered and trimmed and with flagstoned, flower-borderedwalks curving through it. “Riverside”—for such the place was called—hadbeen a lovely and idyllic homestead in its day; and my host could recall it when many tracesof its best period still lingered.

It was raining hard now, with dense sheets of water beating against the insecureroof, walls, and windows, and sending in drops through a thousand chinks and crevices. Moisturetrickled down to the floor from unsuspected places, and the mounting wind rattled the rotting,loose-hinged shutters outside. But I minded none of this, nor even thought of my roadster outsidebeneath the trees, for I saw that a story was coming. Incited to reminiscence, my host madea move to shew me to sleeping-quarters; but kept on recalling the older, better days. Soon,I saw, I would receive an inkling of why he lived alone in that ancient place, and why his neighboursthought it full of undesirable influences. His voice was very musical as he spoke on, and histale soon took a turn which left me no chance to grow drowsy.

“Yes—Riverside was built in 1816, and my father was born here in1828. He’d be over a century old now if he were alive, but he died young—so youngI can just barely remember him. In ’64 that was—he was killed in the war, SeventhLouisiana Infantry C.S.A., for he went back to the old home to enlist. My grandfather was tooold to fight, yet he lived on to be ninety-five, and helped my mother bring me up. A good bringing-up,too—I’ll give them credit. We always had strong traditions—high notions of honour—andmy grandfather saw to it that I grew up the way de Russys have grown up, generation after generation,ever since the Crusades. We weren’t quite wiped out financially, but managed to get onvery comfortably after the war. I went to a good school in Louisiana, and later to Princeton.Later on I was able to get the plantation on a fairly profitable basis—though you see whatit’s come to now.

“My mother died when I was twenty, and my grandfather two years later.It was rather lonely after that; and in ’85 I married a distant cousin in New Orleans.Things might have been different if she’d lived, but she died when my son Denis was born.Then I had only Denis. I didn’t try marriage again, but gave all my time to the boy. Hewas like me—like all the de Russys—darkish and tall and thin, and with the devil ofa temper. I gave him the same training my grandfather had given me, but he didn’t needmuch training when it came to points of honour. It was in him, I reckon. Never saw such highspirit—all I could do to keep him from running away to the Spanish War when he was eleven!Romantic young devil, too—full of high notions—you’d call ’em Victorian,now—no trouble at all to make him let the nigger wenches alone. I sent him to the sameschool I’d gone to, and to Princeton, too. He was Class of 1909.

“In the end he decided to be a doctor, and went a year to the HarvardMedical School. Then he hit on the idea of keeping to the old French tradition of the family,and argued me into sending him across to the Sorbonne. I did—and proudly enough, thoughI knew how lonely I’d be with him so far off. Would to God I hadn’t! I thought hewas the safest kind of a boy to be in Paris. He had a room in the Rue St. Jacques—that’snear the University in the ‘Latin Quarter’—but according to his letters and hisfriends he didn’t cut up with the gayer dogs at all. The people he knew were mostly youngfellows from home—serious students and artists who thought more of their work than of strikingattitudes and painting the town red.

“But of course there were lots of fellows who were on a sort of dividingline between serious studies and the devil. The aesthetes—the decadents, you know. Experimentersin life and sensation—the Baudelaire kind of a chap. Naturally Denis ran up against a goodmany of these, and saw a good deal of their life. They had all sorts of crazy circles and cults—imitationdevil-worship, fake Black Masses, and the like. Doubt if it did them much harm on the whole—probablymost of ’em forgot all about it in a year or two. One of the deepest in this queer stuffwas a fellow Denis had known at school—for that matter, whose father I’d known myself.Frank Marsh, of New Orleans. Disciple of Lafcadio Hearn and Gauguin and Van Gogh—regularepitome of the yellow ’nineties. Poor devil—he had the makings of a great artist,at that.

“Marsh was the oldest friend Denis had in Paris, so as a matter of coursethey saw a good deal of each other—to talk over old times at St. Clair Academy, and allthat. The boy wrote me a good deal about him, and I didn’t see any especial harm when hespoke of the group of mystics Marsh ran with. It seems there was some cult of prehistoric Egyptianand Carthaginian magic having a rage among the Bohemian element on the left bank—some nonsensicalthing that pretended to reach back to forgotten sources of hidden truth in lost African civilisations—thegreat Zimbabwe, the dead Atlantean cities in the Hoggar region of the Sahara—and that hada lot of gibberish connected with snakes and human hair. At least, I called it gibberish, then.Denis used to quote Marsh as saying odd things about the veiled facts behind the legend of Medusa’ssnaky locks—and behind the later Ptolemaic myth of Berenice, who offered up her hair tosave her husband-brother, and had it set in the sky as the constellation Coma Berenices.

“I don’t think this business made much impression on Denis untilthe night of the queer ritual at Marsh’s rooms when he met the priestess. Most of the devoteesof this cult were young fellows, but the head of it was a young woman who called herself ‘Tanit-Isis’—lettingit be known that her real name—her name in this latest incarnation, as she put it—wasMarceline Bedard. She claimed to be the left-handed daughter of Marquis de Chameaux, and seemedto have been both a petty artist and an artist’s model before adopting this more lucrativemagical game. Someone said she had lived for a time in the West Indies—Martinique, I think—butshe was very reticent about herself. Part of her pose was a great show of austerity and holiness,but I don’t think the more experienced students took that very seriously.

“Denis, though, was far from experienced, and wrote me fully ten pagesof slush about the goddess he had discovered. If I’d only realised his simplicity I mighthave done something, but I never thought a puppy infatuation like that could mean much. I feltabsurdly sure that Denis’ touchy personal honour and family pride would always keep himout of the most serious complications.

“As time went on, though, his letters began to make me nervous. He mentionedthis Marceline more and more, and his friends less and less; and began talking about the ‘crueland silly way’ they declined to introduce her to their mothers and sisters. He seems tohave asked her no questions about herself, and I don’t doubt but that she filled him fullof romantic legendry concerning her origin and divine revelations and the way people slightedher. At length I could see that Denis was altogether cutting his own crowd and spending thebulk of his time with this alluring priestess. At her especial request he never told the oldcrowd of their continual meetings; so nobody over there tried to break the affair up.

“I suppose she thought he was fabulously rich; for he had the air of apatrician, and people of a certain class think all aristocratic Americans are wealthy. In anycase, she probably thought this a rare chance to contract a genuine right-handed alliance witha really eligible young man. By the time my nervousness burst into open advice, it was too late.The boy had lawfully married her, and wrote that he was dropping his studies and bringing thewoman home to Riverside. He said she had made a great sacrifice and resigned her leadershipof the magical cult, and that henceforward she would be merely a private gentlewoman—thefuture mistress of Riverside, and mother of de Russys to come.

“Well, sir, I took it the best way I could. I knew that sophisticatedContinentals have different standards from our old American ones—and anyway, I really knewnothing against the woman. A charlatan, perhaps, but why necessarily any worse? I suppose Itried to keep as naive as possible about such things in those days, for the boy’s sake.Clearly, there was nothing for a man of sense to do but to let Denis alone so long as his newwife conformed to de Russy ways. Let her have a chance to prove herself—perhaps she wouldn’thurt the family as much as some might fear. So I didn’t raise any objections or ask anypenitence. The thing was done, and I stood ready to welcome the boy back, whatever he broughtwith him.

“They got here three weeks after the telegram telling of the marriage.Marceline was beautiful—there was no denying that—and I could see how the boy mightvery well get foolish about her. She did have an air of breeding, and I think to this day shemust have had some strains of good blood in her. She was apparently not much over twenty; ofmedium size, fairly slim, and as graceful as a tigress in posture and motions. Her complexionwas a deep olive—like old ivory—and her eyes were large and very dark. She had small,classically regular features—though not quite clean-cut enough to suit my taste—andthe most singular head of jet black hair that I ever saw.

“I didn’t wonder that she had dragged the subject of hair into hermagical cult, for with that heavy profusion of it the idea must have occurred to her naturally.Coiled up, it made her look like some Oriental princess in a drawing of Aubrey Beardsley’s.Hanging down her back, it came well below her knees and shone in the light as if it had possessedsome separate, unholy vitality of its own. I would almost have thought of Medusa or Berenicemyself—without having such things suggested to me—upon seeing and studying that hair.

“Sometimes I thought it moved slightly of itself, and tended to arrangeitself in distinct ropes or strands, but this may have been sheer illusion. She brushed it incessantly,and seemed to use some sort of preparation on it. I got the notion once—a curious, whimsicalnotion—that it was a living thing which she had to feed in some strange way. All nonsense—butit added to my feeling of constraint about her and her hair.

“For I can’t deny that I failed to like her wholly, no matter howhard I tried. I couldn’t tell what the trouble was, but it was there. Something about herrepelled me very subtly, and I could not help weaving morbid and macabre associations abouteverything connected with her. Her complexion called up thoughts of Babylon, Atlantis, Lemuria,and the terrible forgotten dominations of an elder world; her eyes struck me sometimes as theeyes of some unholy forest creature or animal-goddess too immeasurably ancient to be fully human;and her hair—that dense, exotic, overnourished growth of oily inkiness—made one shiveras a great black python might have done. There was no doubt but that she realised my involuntaryattitude—though I tried to hide it, and she tried to hide the fact that she noticed it.

“Yet the boy’s infatuation lasted. He positively fawned on her, andoverdid all the little gallantries of daily life to a sickening degree. She appeared to returnthe feeling, though I could see it took a conscious effort to make her duplicate his enthusiasmsand extravagances. For one thing, I think she was piqued to learn that we weren’t as wealthyas she had expected.

“It was a bad business all told. I could see that sad undercurrents werearising. Denis was half-hypnotised with puppy-love, and began to grow away from me as he feltmy shrinking from his wife. This kind of thing went on for months, and I saw that I was losingmy only son—the boy who had formed the centre of all my thoughts and acts for the pastquarter century. I’ll own that I felt bitter about it—what father wouldn’t? Andyet I could do nothing.

“Marceline seemed to be a good wife enough in those early months, andour friends received her without any quibbling or questioning. I was always nervous, though,about what some of the young fellows in Paris might write home to their relatives after thenews of the marriage spread around. Despite the woman’s love of secrecy, it couldn’tremain hidden forever—indeed, Denis had written a few of his closest friends, in strictconfidence, as soon as he was settled with her at Riverside.

“I got to staying alone in my room more and more, with my failing healthas an excuse. It was about that time that my present spinal neuritis began to develop—whichmade the excuse a pretty good one. Denis didn’t seem to notice the trouble, or take anyinterest in me and my habits and affairs; and it hurt me to see how callous he was getting.I began to get sleepless, and often racked my brain in the night to try to find out what reallywas the matter—what it really was that made my new daughter-in-law so repulsive and evendimly horrible to me. It surely wasn’t her old mystical nonsense, for she had left allthe past behind her and never mentioned it once. She didn’t even do any painting, althoughI understood that she had once dabbled in art.

“Oddly, the only ones who seemed to share my uneasiness were the servants.The darkies around the house seemed very sullen in their attitude toward her, and in a few weeksall save the few who were strongly attached to our family had left. These few—old Scipioand his wife Sarah, the cook Delilah, and Mary, Scipio’s daughter—were as civil aspossible; but plainly revealed that their new mistress commanded their duty rather than theiraffection. They stayed in their own remote part of the house as much as possible. McCabe, ourwhite chauffeur, was insolently admiring rather than hostile; and another exception was a veryold Zulu woman said to have come from Africa over a hundred years before, who had been a sortof leader in her small cabin as a kind of family pensioner. Old Sophonisba always shewed reverencewhenever Marceline came near her, and one time I saw her kiss the ground where her mistresshad walked. Blacks are superstitious animals, and I wondered whether Marceline had been talkingany of her mystical nonsense to our hands in order to overcome their evident dislike.”

III.

“Well, that’s how we went on for nearly half a year. Then, in thesummer of 1916, things began to happen. Toward the middle of June Denis got a note from hisold friend Frank Marsh, telling of a sort of nervous breakdown which made him want to take arest in the country. It was postmarked New Orleans—for Marsh had gone home from Paris whenhe felt the collapse coming on—and seemed a very plain though polite bid for an invitationfrom us. Marsh, of course, knew that Marceline was here; and asked very courteously after her.Denis was sorry to hear of his trouble and told him at once to come along for an indefinitevisit.

“Marsh came—and I was shocked to notice how he had changed sinceI had seen him in his earlier days. He was a smallish, lightish fellow, with blue eyes and anundecided chin; and now I could see the effects of drink and I don’t know what else inhis puffy eyelids, enlarged nose-pores, and heavy lines around the mouth. I reckon he had takenhis pose of decadence pretty seriously, and set out to be as much of a Rimbaud, Baudelaire,or Lautréamont as he could. And yet he was delightful to talk to—for like all decadentshe was exquisitely sensitive to the colour and atmosphere and names of things; admirably, thoroughlyalive, and with whole records of conscious experience in obscure, shadowy fields of living andfeeling which most of us pass over without knowing they exist. Poor young devil—if onlyhis father had lived longer and taken him in hand! There was great stuff in the boy!

“I was glad of the visit, for I felt it would help to set up a normalatmosphere in the house again. And that’s what it really seemed to do at first; for asI said, Marsh was a delight to have around. He was as sincere and profound an artist as I eversaw in my life, and I certainly believe that nothing on earth mattered to him except the perceptionand expression of beauty. When he saw an exquisite thing, or was creating one, his eyes woulddilate until the light irises went nearly out of sight—leaving two mystical black pitsin that weak, delicate, chalk-like face; black pits opening on strange worlds which none ofus could guess about.

“When he reached here, though, he didn’t have many chances to shewthis tendency; for he had, as he told Denis, gone quite stale. It seems he had been very successfulas an artist of a bizarre kind—like Fuseli or Goya or Sime or Clark Ashton Smith—buthad suddenly become played out. The world of ordinary things around him had ceased to hold anythinghe could recognise as beauty—beauty, that is, of enough force and poignancy to arouse hiscreative faculty. He had often been this way before—all decadents are—but this timehe could not invent any new, strange, or outré sensation or experience which would supplythe needed illusion of fresh beauty or stimulatingly adventurous expectancy. He was like a Durtalor a des Esseintes at the most jaded point of his curious orbit.

“Marceline was away when Marsh arrived. She hadn’t been enthusiasticabout his coming, and had refused to decline an invitation from some of our friends in St. Louiswhich came about that time for her and Denis. Denis, of course, stayed to receive his guest;but Marceline had gone on alone. It was the first time they had ever been separated, and I hopedthe interval would help to dispel the sort of daze that was making such a fool of the boy. Marcelineshewed no hurry to get back, but seemed to me to prolong her absence as much as she could. Denisstood it better than one would have expected from such a doting husband, and seemed more likehis old self as he talked over other days with Marsh and tried to cheer the listless aestheteup.

“It was Marsh who seemed most impatient to see the woman; perhaps becausehe thought her strange beauty, or some phase of the mysticism which had gone into her one-timemagical cult, might help to reawaken his interest in things and give him another start towardartistic creation. That there was no baser reason, I was absolutely certain from what I knewof Marsh’s character. With all his weaknesses, he was a gentleman—and it had indeedrelieved me when I first learned that he wanted to come here because his willingness to acceptDenis’ hospitality proved that there was no reason why he shouldn’t.

“When, at last, Marceline did return, I could see that Marsh was tremendouslyaffected. He did not attempt to make her talk of the bizarre thing which she had so definitelyabandoned, but was unable to hide a powerful admiration which kept his eyes—now dilatedin that curious way for the first time during his visit—riveted to her every moment shewas in the room. She, however, seemed uneasy rather than pleased by his steady scrutiny—thatis, she seemed so at first, though this feeling of hers wore away in a few days, and left thetwo on a basis of the most cordial and voluble congeniality. I could see Marsh studying herconstantly when he thought no one was watching; and I wondered how long it would be that onlythe artist, and not the primitive man, would be aroused by her mysterious graces.

“Denis naturally felt some irritation at this turn of affairs; thoughhe realised that his guest was a man of honour and that, as kindred mystics and aesthetes, Marcelineand Marsh would naturally have things and interests to discuss in which a more or less conventionalperson could have no part. He didn’t hold anything against anybody, but merely regrettedthat his own imagination was too limited and traditional to let him talk with Marceline as Marshtalked. At this stage of things I began to see more of the boy. With his wife otherwise busy,he had time to remember that he had a father—and a father who was ready to help him inany sort of perplexity or difficulty.

“We often sat together on the veranda watching Marsh and Marceline asthey rode up or down the drive on horseback, or played tennis on the court that used to stretchsouth of the house. They talked mostly in French, which Marsh, though he hadn’t more thana quarter-portion of French blood, handled more glibly than either Denis or I could speak it.Marceline’s English, always academically correct, was rapidly improving in accent; butit was plain that she relished dropping back into her mother-tongue. As we looked at the congenialcouple they made, I could see the boy’s cheek and throat muscles tighten—though hewasn’t a whit less ideal a host to Marsh, or a whit less considerate a husband to Marceline.

“All this was generally in the afternoon; for Marceline rose very late,had breakfast in bed, and took an immense amount of time preparing to come downstairs. I neverknew of anyone so wrapped up in cosmetics, beauty exercises, hair-oils, unguents, and everythingof that kind. It was in these morning hours that Denis and Marsh did their real visiting, andexchanged the close confidences which kept their friendship up despite the strain that jealousyimposed.

“Well, it was in one of those morning talks on the veranda that Marshmade the proposition which brought on the end. I was laid up with some of my neuritis, but hadmanaged to get downstairs and stretch out on the front parlour sofa near the long window. Denisand Marsh were just outside; so I couldn’t help hearing all they said. They had been talkingabout art, and the curious, capricious environmental elements needed to jolt an artist intoproducing the real article, when Marsh suddenly swerved from abstractions to the personal applicationhe must have had in mind from the start.

“‘I suppose,’ he was saying, ‘that nobody can tell justwhat it is in some scenes or objects that makes them aesthetic stimuli for certain individuals.Basically, of course, it must have some reference to each man’s background of stored-upmental associations, for no two people have the same scale of sensitiveness and responses. Wedecadents are artists for whom all ordinary things have ceased to have any emotional or imaginativesignificance, but no one of us responds in the same way to exactly the same extraordinary thing.Now take me, for instance.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’

“He paused and resumed.

“‘I know, Denny, that I can say these things to you because you havesuch a preternaturally unspoiled mind—clean, fine, direct, objective, and all that. Youwon’t misunderstand as an oversubtilised, effete man of the world might.’

“He paused once more.

“‘The fact is, I think I know what’s needed to set my imaginationworking again. I’ve had a dim idea of it ever since we were in Paris, but I’m surenow. It’s Marceline, old chap—that face and that hair, and the train of shadowy imagesthey bring up. Not merely visible beauty—though God knows there’s enough of that—butsomething peculiar and individualised, that can’t exactly be explained. Do you know, inthe last few days I’ve felt the existence of such a stimulus so keenly that I honestlythink I could outdo myself—break into the real masterpiece class if I could get hold ofpaint and canvas at just the time when her face and hair set my fancy stirring and weaving.There’s something weird and other-worldly about it—something joined up with the dimancient thing Marceline represents. I don’t know how much she’s told you about thatside of her, but I can assure you there’s plenty of it. She has some marvellous links withthe outside.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”

“Some change in Denis’ expression must have halted the speaker here,for there was a considerable spell of silence before the words went on. I was utterly takenaback, for I’d expected no such overt development like this; and I wondered what my son couldbe thinking. My heart began to pound violently, and I strained my ears in the frankest of intentionaleavesdropping. Then Marsh resumed.

“‘Of course you’re jealous—I know how a speech like minemust sound—but I can swear to you that you needn’t be.’

“Denis did not answer, and Marsh went on.

“‘To tell the truth, I could never be in love with Marceline—Icouldn’t even be a cordial friend of hers in the warmest sense. Why, damn it all, I feltlike a hypocrite talking with her these days as I’ve been doing.

“‘The case simply is, that one phase of her half hypnotises me ina certain way—a very strange, fantastic, and dimly terrible way—just as another phasehalf hypnotises you in a much more normal way. I see something in her—or to be psychologicallyexact, something through her or beyond her—that you don’t see at all. Something thatbrings up a vast pageantry of shapes from forgotten abysses, and makes me want to paint incrediblethings whose outlines vanish the instant I try to envisage them clearly. Don’t mistake,Denny, your wife is a magnificent being, a splendid focus of cosmic forces who has a rightto be called divine if anything on earth has!’

“I felt a clearing of the situation at this point, for the abstract strangenessof Marsh’s expressed statement, plus the flattery he was now heaping on Marceline, couldnot fail to disarm and mollify one as fondly proud of his consort as Denis always was. Marshevidently caught the change himself, for there was more confidence in his tone as he continued.

“‘I must paint her, Denny—must paint that hair—and you won’tregret it. There’s something more than mortal about that hair—something more thanbeautiful—’

“He paused, and I wondered what Denis could be thinking. I wondered, indeed,what I was really thinking myself. Was Marsh’s interest actually that of the artist alone,or was he merely infatuated as Denis had been? I had thought, in their schooldays, that he hadenvied my boy; and I dimly felt that it might be the same now. On the other hand, somethingin that talk of artistic stimulus had rung amazingly true; so that the more I pondered, themore I was inclined to take the stuff at face value. Denis seemed to do so, too, for althoughI could not catch his low-spoken reply, I could tell by the effect it produced that it musthave been affirmative.

“There was a sound of someone slapping another on the back, and then agrateful speech from Marsh that I was long to remember.

“‘That’s great, Denny; and just as I told you, you’ll neverregret it. In a sense, I’m half doing it for you. You’ll be a different man when yousee it. I’ll put you back where you used to be—give you a waking-up and a sort ofsalvation—but you can’t see what I mean as yet. Just remember old friendship, anddon’t get the idea that I’m not the same old bird!’

“I rose perplexedly as I saw the two stroll off across the lawn, arm inarm, and smoking in unison. What could Marsh have meant by his strange and almost ominous reassurance?The more my fears were quieted in one direction, the more they were aroused in another. Lookat it in any way I could, it seemed to be rather a bad business.

“But matters got started just the same. Denis fixed up an attic room withskylights, and Marsh sent for all sorts of painting equipment. Everyone was rather excited aboutthe new venture, and I was at least glad that something was on foot to break the brooding tension.Soon the sittings began, and we all took them quite seriously—for we could see that Marshregarded them as important artistic events. Denny and I used to go quietly about the house asthough something sacred were occurring, and we knew that it was sacred so far as Marsh was concerned.

“With Marceline, though, it was a different matter, as I began to seeat once. Whatever Marsh’s reactions to the sittings may have been, hers were painfullyobvious. Every possible way she betrayed a frank and commonplace infatuation for the artist,and would repulse Denis’ marks of affection whenever she dared. Oddly, I noticed this morevividly than Denis himself, and tried to devise some plan for keeping the boy’s mind easyuntil the matter could be straightened out. There was no use in having him excited about itif it could be helped.

“In the end I decided that Denis had better be away while the disagreeablesituation existed. I could represent his interests well enough at this end, and sooner or laterMarsh would finish the picture and go. My view of Marsh’s honour was such that I did notlook for any worse developments. When the matter had blown over, and Marceline had forgottenabout her new infatuation, it would be time enough to have Denis on hand again.

“So I wrote a long letter to my marketing and financial agent in New York,and cooked up a plan to have the boy summoned there for an indefinite time. I had the agentwrite him that our affairs absolutely required one of us to go East, and of course my illnessmade it clear that I could not be the one. It was arranged that when Denis got to New York hewould find enough plausible matters to keep him busy as long as I thought he ought to be away.

“The plan worked perfectly, and Denis started for New York without theleast suspicion; Marceline and Marsh going with him in the car to Cape Girardeau, where he caughtthe afternoon train to St. Louis. They returned about dark, and as McCabe drove the car backto the stables I could hear them talking on the veranda—in those same chairs near the longparlour window where Marsh and Denis had sat when I overheard them talk about the portrait.This time I resolved to do some intentional eavesdropping, so quietly went down to the frontparlour and stretched out on the sofa near the window.

“At first I could not hear anything, but very shortly there came a soundas of a chair being shifted, followed by a short, sharp breath and a sort of inarticulatelyhurt exclamation from Marceline. Then I heard Marsh speaking in a strained, almost formal voice.

“‘I’d enjoy working tonight if you’re not too tired.’

“Marceline’s reply was in the same hurt tone which had marked herexclamation. She used English as he had done.

“‘Oh, Frank, is that really all you care about? Forever working!Can’t we just sit out in this glorious moonlight?’

“He answered impatiently, his voice shewing a certain contempt beneaththe dominant quality of artistic enthusiasm.

“‘Moonlight! Good God, what cheap sentimentality! For a supposedlysophisticated person you surely do hang on to some of the crudest claptrap that ever escapedfrom the dime novels! With art at your elbow, you have to think of the moon—cheap as aspotlight at the varieties! Or perhaps it makes you think of the Roodmas dance around the stonepillars at Auteuil. Hell, how you used to make those goggle-eyed yaps stare! But no—I supposeyou’ve dropped all that now. No more Atlantean magic or hair-snake rites for Madame deRussy! I’m the only one to remember the old things—the things that came down throughthe temples of Tanit and echoed on the ramparts of Zimbabwe. But I won’t be cheated ofthat remembrance—all that is weaving itself into the thing on my canvas—the thingthat is going to capture wonder and crystallise the secrets of 75,000 years.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’

“Marceline interrupted in a voice full of mixed emotions.

“‘It’s you who are cheaply sentimental now! You know well thatthe old things had better be let alone. All of you had better look out if ever I chant the oldrites or try to call up what lies hidden in Yuggoth, Zimbabwe, and R’lyeh. I thought youhad more sense!

“‘You lack logic. You want me to be interested in this precious paintingof yours, yet you never let me see what you’re doing. Always that black cloth over it!It’s of me—I shouldn’t think it would matter if I saw it.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’

“Marsh was interrupting this time, his voice curiously hard and strained.

“‘No. Not now. You’ll see it in due course of time. You sayit’s of you—yes, it’s that, but it’s more. If you knew, you mightn’tbe so impatient. Poor Denis! My God, it’s a shame!’

“My throat went suddenly dry as the words rose to an almost febrile pitch.What could Marsh mean? Suddenly I saw that he had stopped and was entering the house alone.I heard the front door slam, and listened as his footsteps ascended the stairs. Outside on theveranda I could still hear Marceline’s heavy, angry breathing. I crept away sick at heart,feeling that there were grave things to ferret out before I could safely let Denis come back.

“After that evening the tension around the place was even worse than before.Marceline had always lived on flattery and fawning, and the shock of those few blunt words fromMarsh was too much for her temperament. There was no living in the house with her any more,for with poor Denis gone she took out her abusiveness on everybody. When she could find no oneindoors to quarrel with she would go out to Sophonisba’s cabin and spend hours talkingwith the queer old Zulu woman. Aunt Sophy was the only person who would fawn abjectly enoughto suit her, and when I tried once to overhear their conversation I found Marceline whisperingabout ‘elder secrets’ and ‘unknown Kadath’ while the negress rocked to andfro in her chair, making inarticulate sounds of reverence and admiration every now and then.

“But nothing could break her dog-like infatuation for Marsh. She wouldtalk bitterly and sullenly to him, yet was getting more and more obedient to his wishes. Itwas very convenient for him, since he now became able to make her pose for the picture wheneverhe felt like painting. He tried to shew gratitude for this willingness, but I thought I coulddetect a kind of contempt or even loathing beneath his careful politeness. For my part, I franklyhated Marceline! There was no use in calling my attitude anything as mild as mere dislike thesedays. Certainly, I was glad Denis was away. His letters, not nearly so frequent as I wished,shewed signs of strain and worry.

“As the middle of August went by I gathered from Marsh’s remarksthat the portrait was nearly done. His mood seemed increasingly sardonic, though Marceline’stemper improved a bit as the prospect of seeing the thing tickled her vanity. I can still recallthe day when Marsh said he’d have everything finished within a week. Marceline brightenedup perceptibly, though not without a venomous look at me. It seemed as if her coiled hair visiblytightened about her head.

“‘I’m to be the first to see it!’ she snapped. Then, smilingat Marsh, she said, ‘And if I don’t like it I shall slash it to pieces!’

“Marsh’s face took on the most curious look I have ever seen it wearas he answered her.

“‘I can’t vouch for your taste, Marceline, but I swear it willbe magnificent! Not that I want to take much credit—art creates itself—and this thinghad to be done. Just wait!’

“During the next few days I felt a queer sense of foreboding, as if thecompletion of the picture meant a kind of catastrophe instead of a relief. Denis, too, had notwritten me, and my agent in New York said he was planning some trip to the country. I wonderedwhat the outcome of the whole thing would be. What a queer mixture of elements—Marsh andMarceline, Denis and I! How would all these ultimately react on one another? When my fears grewtoo great I tried to lay them all to my infirmity, but that explanation never quite satisfiedme.”

IV.

“Well, the thing exploded on Tuesday, the twenty-sixth of August. I hadrisen at my usual time and had breakfast, but was not good for much because of the pain in myspine. It had been troubling me badly of late, and forcing me to take opiates when it got toounbearable; nobody else was downstairs except the servants, though I could hear Marceline movingabout in her room. Marsh slept in the attic next his studio, and had begun to keep such latehours that he was seldom up till noon. About ten o’clock the pain got the better of me,so that I took a double dose of my opiate and lay down on the parlour sofa. The last I heardwas Marceline’s pacing overhead. Poor creature—if I had known! She must have beenwalking before the long mirror admiring herself. That was like her. Vain from start to finish—revellingin her own beauty, just as she revelled in all the little luxuries Denis was able to give her.

“I didn’t wake up till near sunset, and knew instantly how long Ihad slept from the golden light and long shadows outside the long window. Nobody was about,and a sort of unnatural stillness seemed to be hovering over everything. From afar, though,I thought I could sense a faint howling, wild and intermittent, whose quality had a slight butbaffling familiarity about it. I’m not much for psychic premonitions, but I was frightfullyuneasy from the start. There had been dreams—even worse than the ones I had been dreamingin the weeks before—and this time they seemed hideously linked to some black and festeringreality. The whole place had a poisonous air. Afterward I reflected that certain sounds musthave filtered through to my unconscious brain during those hours of drugged sleep. My pain,though, was very much eased; and I rose and walked without difficulty.

“Soon enough I began to see that something was wrong. Marsh and Marcelinemight have been riding, but someone ought to have been getting dinner in the kitchen. Instead,there was only silence, except for that faint distant howl or wail; and nobody answered whenI pulled the old-fashioned bell-cord to summon Scipio. Then, chancing to look up, I saw thespreading stain on the ceiling—the bright red stain, that must have come through the floorof Marceline’s room.

“In an instant I forgot my crippled back and hurried upstairs to findout the worst. Everything under the sun raced through my mind as I struggled with the dampness-warpeddoor of that silent chamber, and most hideous of all was a terrible sense of malign fulfilmentand fatal expectedness. I had, it struck me, known all along that nameless horrors were gathering;that something profoundly and cosmically evil had gained a foot-hold under my roof from whichonly blood and tragedy could result.

“The door gave at last, and I stumbled into the large room beyond—alldim from the branches of the great trees outside the windows. For a moment I could do nothingbut flinch at the faint evil odour that immediately struck my nostrils. Then, turning on theelectric light and glancing around, I glimpsed a nameless blasphemy on the yellow and blue rug.

“It lay face down in a great pool of dark, thickened blood, and had thegory print of a shod human foot in the middle of its naked back. Blood was spattered everywhere—onthe walls, furniture, and floor. My knees gave way as I took in the sight, so that I had tostumble to a chair and slump down. The thing had obviously been a human being, though its identitywas not easy to establish at first; since it was without clothes, and had most of its hair hackedand torn from the scalp in a very crude way. It was of a deep ivory colour, and I knew thatit must have been Marceline. The shoe-print on the back made the thing seem all the more hellish.I could not even picture the strange, loathsome tragedy which must have taken place while Islept in the room below. When I raised my hand to wipe my dripping forehead I saw that my fingerswere sticky with blood. I shuddered, then realised that it must have come from the knob of thedoor which the unknown murderer had forced shut behind him as he left. He had taken his weaponwith him, it seemed, for no instrument of death was visible here.

“As I studied the floor I saw that a line of sticky footprints like theone on the body led away from the horror to the door. There was another blood-trail, too, andof a less easily explainable kind; a broadish, continuous line, as if marking the path of somehuge snake. At first I concluded it must be due to something the murderer had dragged afterhim. Then, noting the way some of the footprints seemed to be superimposed on it, I was forcedto believe that it had been there when the murderer left. But what crawling entity could havebeen in that room with the victim and her assassin, leaving before the killer when the deedwas done? As I asked myself this question I thought I heard fresh bursts of that faint, distantwailing.

“Finally, rousing myself from a lethargy of horror, I got on my feet againand began following the footprints. Who the murderer was, I could not even faintly guess, norcould I try to explain the absence of the servants. I vaguely felt that I ought to go up toMarsh’s attic quarters, but before I had fully formulated the idea I saw that the bloodytrail was indeed taking me there. Was he himself the murderer? Had he gone mad under the strainof the morbid situation and suddenly run amok?

“In the attic corridor the trail became faint, the prints almost ceasingas they merged with the dark carpet. I could still, however, discern the strange single pathof the entity who had gone first; and this led straight to the closed door of Marsh’s studio,disappearing beneath it at a point about half way from side to side. Evidently it had crossedthe threshold at a time when the door was wide open.

“Sick at heart, I tried the knob and found the door unlocked. Openingit, I paused in the waning north light to see what fresh nightmare might be awaiting me. Therewas certainly something human on the floor, and I reached for the switch to turn on the chandelier.

“But as the light flashed up my gaze left the floor and its horror—thatwas Marsh, poor devil—to fix itself frantically and incredulously upon the living thingthat cowered and stared in the open doorway leading to Marsh’s bedroom. It was a tousled,wild-eyed thing, crusted with dried blood and carrying in its hand a wicked machete which hadbeen one of the ornaments of the studio wall. Yet even in that awful moment I recognised itas one whom I had thought more than a thousand miles away. It was my own boy Denis—or themaddened wreck which had once been Denis.

“The sight of me seemed to bring back a trifle of sanity—or at leastof memory—in the poor boy. He straightened up and began to toss his head about as if tryingto shake free from some enveloping influence. I could not speak a word, but moved my lips inan effort to get back my voice. My eyes wandered for a moment to the figure on the floor infront of the heavily draped easel—the figure toward which the strange blood-trail led,and which seemed to be tangled in the coils of some dark, ropy object. The shifting of my glanceapparently produced some impression in the twisted brain of the boy, for suddenly he began tomutter in a hoarse whisper whose purport I was soon able to catch.

“‘I had to exterminate her—she was the devil—the summitand high-priestess of all evil—the spawn of the pit—Marsh knew, and tried to warnme. Good old Frank—I didn’t kill him, though I was ready to before I realised. ButI went down there and killed her—then that cursed hair—’

“I listened in horror as Denis choked, paused, and began again.

“‘You didn’t know—her letters got queer and I knew shewas in love with Marsh. Then she nearly stopped writing. He never mentioned her—I feltsomething was wrong, and thought I ought to come back and find out. Couldn’t tell you—yourmanner would have given it away. Wanted to surprise them. Got here about noon today—camein a cab and sent the house-servants all off—let the field hands alone, for their cabinsare all out of earshot. Told McCabe to get me some things in Cape Girardeau and not bother tocome back till tomorrow. Had all the niggers take the old car and let Mary drive them to BendVillage for a vacation—told ’em we were all going on some sort of outing and wouldn’tneed help. Said they’d better stay all night with Uncle Scip’s cousin, who keeps thatnigger boarding-house.’

“Denis was getting very incoherent now, and I strained my ears to graspevery word. Again I thought I heard that wild, far-off wail, but the story had first place forthe present.

“‘Saw you sleeping in the parlour, and took a chance you wouldn’twake up. Then went upstairs on the quiet to hunt up Marsh and&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. thatwoman!’

“The boy shuddered as he avoided pronouncing Marceline’s name. Atthe same time I saw his eyes dilate in unison with a bursting of the distant crying, whose vaguefamiliarity had now become very great.

“‘She was not in her room, so I went up to the studio. Door was shut,and I could hear voices inside. Didn’t knock—just burst in and found her posing forthe picture. Nude, but with that hellish hair all draped around her. And making all sorts ofsheep’s eyes at Marsh. He had the easel turned half away from the door, so I couldn’tsee the picture. Both of them were pretty well jolted when I shewed up, and Marsh dropped hisbrush. I was in a rage and told him he’d have to shew me the portrait, but he got calmerevery minute. Told me it wasn’t quite done, but would be in a day or two—said I couldsee it then—she—hadn’t seen it.

“‘But that didn’t go with me. I stepped up, and he dropped avelvet curtain over the thing before I could see it. He was ready to fight before letting mesee it, but that—that—she—stepped up and sided with me. Said we ought to seeit. Frank got horribly worked up, and gave me a punch when I tried to get at the curtain. Ipunched back and seemed to have knocked him out. Then I was almost knocked out myself by theshriek that—that creature—gave. She’d drawn aside the hangings herself, and hadcaught a look at what Marsh had been painting. I wheeled around and saw her rushing like madout of the room—then I saw the picture.’

“Madness flared up in the boy’s eyes again as he got to this place,and I thought for a minute he was going to spring at me with his machete. But after a pausehe partly steadied himself.

“‘Oh, God—that thing! Don’t ever look at it! Burn it withthe hangings around it and throw the ashes into the river! Marsh knew—and was warning me.He knew what it was—what that woman—that leopardess, or gorgon, or lamia, or whatevershe was—actually represented. He’d tried to hint to me ever since I met her in hisParis studio, but it couldn’t be told in words. I thought they all wronged her when theywhispered horrors about her—she had me hypnotised so that I couldn’t believe the plainfacts—but this picture has caught the whole secret—the whole monstrous background!

“‘God, but Frank is an artist! That thing is the greatest piece ofwork any living soul has produced since Rembrandt! It’s a crime to burn it—but itwould be a greater crime to let it exist—just as it would have been an abhorrent sin tolet—that she-daemon—exist any longer. The minute I saw it I understood what—she—was,and what part she played in the frightful secret that has come down from the days of Cthulhuand the Elder Ones—the secret that was nearly wiped out when Atlantis sank, but that kepthalf alive in hidden traditions and allegorical myths and furtive, midnight cult-practices.For you know she was the real thing. It wasn’t any fake. It would have been merciful ifit had been a fake. It was the old, hideous shadow that philosophers never dared mention—thething hinted at in the Necronomicon and symbolised in the Easter Island colossi.

“‘She thought we couldn’t see through—that the false frontwould hold till we had bartered away our immortal souls. And she was half right—she’dhave got me in the end. She was only—waiting. But Frank—good old Frank—was toomuch for me. He knew what it all meant, and painted it. I don’t wonder she shriekedand ran off when she saw it. It wasn’t quite done, but God knows enough was there.

“‘Then I knew I’d got to kill her—kill her, and everythingconnected with her. It was a taint that wholesome human blood couldn’t bear. There wassomething else, too—but you’ll never know that if you burn the picture without looking.I staggered down to her room with this machete that I got off the wall here, leaving Frank stillknocked out. He was breathing, though, and I knew and thanked heaven that I hadn’t killedhim.

“‘I found her in front of the mirror braiding that accursed hair.She turned on me like a wild beast, and began spitting out her hatred of Marsh. The fact thatshe’d been in love with him—and I knew she had—only made it worse. For a minuteI couldn’t move, and she came within an ace of completely hypnotising me. Then I thoughtof the picture, and the spell broke. She saw the breaking in my eyes, and must have noticedthe machete, too. I never saw anything give such a wild jungle beast look as she did then. Shesprang for me with claws out like a leopard’s, but I was too quick. I swung the machete,and it was all over.’

“Denis had to stop again there, and I saw the perspiration running downhis forehead through the spattered blood. But in a moment he hoarsely resumed.

“‘I said it was all over—but God! some of it had only just begun!I felt I had fought the legions of Satan, and put my foot on the back of the thing I had annihilated.Then I saw that blasphemous braid of coarse black hair begin to twist and squirm of itself.

“‘I might have known it. It was all in the old tales. That damnablehair had a life of its own, that couldn’t be ended by killing the creature itself. I knewI’d have to burn it, so I started to hack it off with the machete. God, but it was devilishwork! Tough—like iron wires—but I managed to do it. And it was loathsome the way thebig braid writhed and struggled in my grasp.

“‘About the time I had the last strand cut or pulled off I heardthat eldritch wailing from behind the house. You know—it’s still going off and on.I don’t know what it is, but it must be something springing from this hellish business.It half seems like something I ought to know but can’t quite place. It got my nerves thefirst time I heard it, and I dropped the severed braid in my fright. Then, I got a worse fright—forin another second the braid had turned on me and began to strike venomously with one of itsends which had knotted itself up like a sort of grotesque head. I struck out with the machete,and it turned away. Then, when I had my breath again, I saw that the monstrous thing was crawlingalong the floor by itself like a great black snake. I couldn’t do anything for a while,but when it vanished through the door I managed to pull myself together and stumble after it.I could follow the broad, bloody trail, and I saw it led upstairs. It brought me here—andmay heaven curse me if I didn’t see it through the doorway, striking at poor dazed Marshlike a maddened rattler as it had struck at me, finally coiling around him as a python would.He had begun to come to, but that abominable serpent thing got him before he was on his feet.I knew that all of that woman’s hatred was behind it, but I hadn’t the power to pullit off. I tried, but it was too much for me. Even the machete was no good—I couldn’tswing it freely or it would have slashed Frank to pieces. So I saw those monstrous coils tighten—sawpoor Frank crushed to death before my eyes—and all the time that awful faint howling camefrom somewhere beyond the fields.

“‘That’s all. I pulled the velvet cloth over the picture andhope it’ll never be lifted. The thing must be burnt. I couldn’t pry the coils offpoor, dead Frank—they cling to him like a leach, and seem to have lost their motion altogether.It’s as if that snaky rope of hair has a kind of perverse fondness for the man it killed—it’sclinging to him—embracing him. You’ll have to burn poor Frank with it—but forGod’s sake don’t forget to see it in ashes. That and the picture. They must both go.The safety of the world demands that they go.’

“Denis might have whispered more, but a fresh burst of distant wailingcut us short. For the first time we knew what it was, for a westerly veering wind brought articulatewords at last. We ought to have known long before, since sounds much like it had often comefrom the same source. It was wrinkled Sophonisba, the ancient Zulu witch-woman who had fawnedon Marceline, keening from her cabin in a way which crowned the horrors of this nightmare tragedy.We could both hear some of the things she howled, and knew that secret and primordial bondslinked this savage sorceress with that other inheritor of elder secrets who had just been extirpated.Some of the words she used betrayed her closeness to daemonic and palaeogean traditions.

“‘Iä! Iä! Shub-Niggurath! Ya-R’lyeh! N’gagi n’bulubwana n’lolo! Ya, yo, pore Missy Tanit, pore Missy Isis! Marse Clooloo, come up outende water an’ git yo chile—she done daid! She done daid! De hair ain’ got no missusno mo’, Marse Clooloo. Ol’ Sophy, she know! Ol’ Sophy, she done got de blackstone outen Big Zimbabwe in ol’ Affriky! Ol’ Sophy, she done dance in de moonshineroun’ de crocodile-stone befo’ de N’bangus cotch her and sell her to de shipfolks! No mo’ Tanit! No mo’ Isis! No mo’ witch-woman to keep de fire a-goin’in de big stone place! Ya, yo! N’gagi n’bulu bwana n’lolo! Iä! Shub-Niggurath!She daid! Ol’ Sophy know!’

“That wasn’t the end of the wailing, but it was all I could pay attentionto. The expression on my boy’s face shewed that it had reminded him of something frightful,and the tightening of his hand on the machete boded no good. I knew he was desperate, and sprangto disarm him if possible before he could do anything more.

“But I was too late. An old man with a bad spine doesn’t count formuch physically. There was a terrible struggle, but he had done for himself before many secondswere over. I’m not sure yet but that he tried to kill me, too. His last panting words weresomething about the need of wiping out everything that had been connected with Marceline, eitherby blood or marriage.”

V.

“I wonder to this day that I didn’t go stark mad in that instant—orin the moments and hours afterward. In front of me was the slain body of my boy—the onlyhuman being I had to cherish—and ten feet away, in front of that shrouded easel, was thebody of his best friend, with a nameless coil of horror wound around it. Below was the scalpedcorpse of that she-monster, about whom I was half-ready to believe anything. I was too dazedto analyse the probability of the hair story—and even if I had not been, that dismal howlingfrom Aunt Sophy’s cabin would have been enough to quiet doubt for the nonce.

“If I’d been wise, I’d have done just what poor Denis told meto—burned the picture and the body-grasping hair at once and without curiosity—butI was too shaken to be wise. I suppose I muttered foolish things over my boy—and then Iremembered that the night was wearing on and that the servants would be back in the morning.It was plain that a matter like this could never be explained, and I knew that I must coverthings up and invent a story.

“That coil of hair around Marsh was a monstrous thing. As I poked at itwith a sword which I took from the wall I almost thought I felt it tighten its grip on the deadman. I didn’t dare touch it—and the longer I looked at it the more horrible thingsI noticed about it. One thing gave me a start. I won’t mention it—but it partly explainedthe need for feeding the hair with queer oils as Marceline had always done.

“In the end I decided to bury all three bodies in the cellar—withquicklime, which I knew we had in the storehouse. It was a night of hellish work. I dug threegraves—my boy’s a long way from the other two, for I didn’t want him to be neareither the woman’s body or her hair. I was sorry I couldn’t get the coil from aroundpoor Marsh. It was terrible work getting them all down to the cellar. I used blankets in cartingthe woman and the poor devil with the coil around him. Then I had to get two barrels of limefrom the storehouse. God must have given me strength, for I not only moved them both but filledall three graves without a hitch.

“Some of the lime I made into whitewash. I had to take a stepladder andfix over the parlour ceiling where the blood had oozed through. And I burned nearly everythingin Marceline’s room, scrubbing the walls and floor and heavy furniture. I washed up theattic studio, too, and the trail and footprints that led there. And all the time I could hearold Sophy’s wailing in the distance. The devil must have been in that creature to let hervoice go on like that. But she always was howling queer things. That’s why the field niggersdidn’t get scared or curious that night. I locked the studio door and took the key to myroom. Then I burned all my stained clothes in the fireplace. By dawn the whole house lookedquite normal so far as any casual eye could tell. I hadn’t dared touch the covered easel,but meant to attend to that later.

“Well, the servants came back next day, and I told them all the youngfolks had gone to St. Louis. None of the field hands seemed to have seen or heard anything,and old Sophonisba’s wailing had stopped at the instant of sunrise. She was like a sphinxafter that, and never let out a word of what had been on her brooding witch-brain the day andnight before.

“Later on I pretended that Denis and Marsh and Marceline had gone backto Paris and had a certain discreet agency mail me letters from there—letters I had fixedup in forged handwriting. It took a good deal of deceit and reticence to explain things to variousfriends, and I know people have secretly suspected me of holding something back. I had the deathsof Marsh and Denis reported during the war, and later said Marceline had entered a convent.Fortunately Marsh was an orphan whose eccentric ways had alienated him from his people in Louisiana.Things might have been patched up a good deal better for me if I had had the sense to burn thepicture, sell the plantation, and give up trying to manage things with a shaken and overstrainedmind. You see what my folly has brought me to. Failing crops—hands discharged one by one—placefalling to ruin—and myself a hermit and a target for dozens of queer countryside stories.Nobody will come around here after dark nowadays—or any other time if it can be helped.That’s why I knew you must be a stranger.

“And why do I stay here? I can’t wholly tell you that. It’sbound up too closely with things at the very rim of sane reality. It wouldn’t have beenso, perhaps, if I hadn’t looked at the picture. I ought to have done as poor Denis toldme. I honestly meant to burn it when I went up to that locked studio a week after the horror,but I looked first—and that changed everything.

“No—there’s no use telling what I saw. You can, in a way, seefor yourself presently; though time and dampness have done their work. I don’t think itcan hurt you if you want to take a look, but it was different with me. I knew too much of whatit all meant.

“Denis had been right—it was the greatest triumph of human art sinceRembrandt, even though still unfinished. I grasped that at the start, and knew that poor Marshhad justified his decadent philosophy. He was to painting what Baudelaire was to poetry—andMarceline was the key that had unlocked his inmost stronghold of genius.

“The thing almost stunned me when I pulled aside the hangings—stunnedme before I half knew what the whole thing was. You know, it’s only partly a portrait.Marsh had been pretty literal when he hinted that he wasn’t painting Marceline alone, butwhat he saw through her and beyond her.

“Of course she was in it—was the key to it, in a sense—but herfigure only formed one point in a vast composition. She was nude except for that hideous webof hair spun around her, and was half-seated, half-reclining on a sort of bench or divan, carvedin patterns unlike those of any known decorative tradition. There was a monstrously shaped gobletin one hand, from which was spilling fluid whose colour I haven’t been able to place orclassify to this day—I don’t know where Marsh even got the pigments.

“The figure and the divan were in the left-hand foreground of the strangestsort of scene I ever saw in my life. I think there was a faint suggestion of its all being akind of emanation from the woman’s brain, yet there was also a directly opposite suggestion—asif she were just an evil image or hallucination conjured up by the scene itself.

“I can’t tell you now whether it’s an exterior or an interior—whetherthose hellish Cyclopean vaultings are seen from the outside or the inside, or whether they areindeed carven stone and not merely a morbid fungous arborescence. The geometry of the wholething is crazy—one gets the acute and obtuse angles all mixed up.

“And God! The shapes of nightmare that float around in that perpetualdaemon twilight! The blasphemies that lurk and leer and hold a Witches’ Sabbat with thatwoman as a high-priestess! The black shaggy entities that are not quite goats—the crocodile-headedbeast with three legs and a dorsal row of tentacles—and the flat-nosed aegipans dancingin a pattern that Egypt’s priests knew and called accursed!

“But the scene wasn’t Egypt—it was behind Egypt; behindeven Atlantis; behind fabled Mu, and myth-whispered Lemuria. It was the ultimate fountain-headof all horror on this earth, and the symbolism shewed only too clearly how integral a part ofit Marceline was. I think it must be the unmentionable R’lyeh, that was not built by anycreatures of this planet—the thing Marsh and Denis used to talk about in the shadows withhushed voices. In the picture it appears that the whole scene is deep under water—thougheverybody seems to be breathing freely.

“Well—I couldn’t do anything but look and shudder, and finallyI saw that Marceline was watching me craftily out of those monstrous, dilated eyes on the canvas.It was no mere superstition—Marsh had actually caught something of her horrible vitalityin his symphonies of line and colour, so that she still brooded and stared and hated, just asif most of her weren’t down in the cellar under quicklime. And it was worst of all whensome of those Hecate-born snaky strands of hair began to lift themselves up from the surfaceand grope out into the room toward me.

“Then it was that I knew the last final horror, and realised I was a guardianand a prisoner forever. She was the thing from which the first dim legends of Medusa and theGorgons had sprung, and something in my shaken will had been captured and turned to stone atlast. Never again would I be safe from those coiling snaky strands—the strands in the picture,and those that lay brooding under the lime near the wine casks. All too late I recalled thetales of the virtual indestructibility, even through centuries of burial, of the hair of thedead.

“My life since has been nothing but horror and slavery. Always there hadlurked the fear of what broods down in the cellar. In less than a month the niggers began whisperingabout the great black snake that crawled around near the wine casks after dark, and about thecurious way its trail would lead to another spot six feet away. Finally I had to move everythingto another part of the cellar, for not a darky could be induced to go near the place where thesnake was seen.

“Then the field hands began talking about the black snake that visitedold Sophonisba’s cabin every night after midnight. One of them shewed me its trail—andnot long afterward I found out that Aunt Sophy herself had begun to pay strange visits to thecellar of the big house, lingering and muttering for hours in the very spot where none of theother blacks would go near. God, but I was glad when that old witch died! I honestly believeshe had been a priestess of some ancient and terrible tradition back in Africa. She must havelived to be almost a hundred and fifty years old.

“Sometimes I think I hear something gliding around the house at night.There will be a queer noise on the stairs, where the boards are loose, and the latch of my roomwill rattle as if with an inward pressure. I always keep my door locked, of course. Then thereare certain mornings when I seem to catch a sickish musty odour in the corridors, and noticea faint, ropy trail through the dust of the floors. I know I must guard the hair in the picture,for if anything were to happen to it, there are entities in this house which would take a sureand terrible revenge. I don’t even dare to die—for life and death are all one to thosein the clutch of what came out of R’lyeh. Something would be on hand to punish my neglect.Medusa’s coil has got me, and it will always be the same. Never mix up with secret andultimate horror, young man, if you value your immortal soul.”

VI.

As the old man finished his story I saw that the small lamp had long sinceburned dry, and that the large one was nearly empty. It must, I knew, be near dawn; and my earstold me that the storm was over. The tale had held me in a half-daze, and I almost feared toglance at the door lest it reveal an inward pressure from some unnamable source. It would behard to say which had the greatest hold on me—stark horror, incredulity, or a kind of morbidfantastic curiosity. I was wholly beyond speech and had to wait for my strange host to breakthe spell.

“Do you want to see—the thing?”

His voice was very low and hesitant, and I saw he was tremendously in earnest.Of my various emotions, curiosity gained the upper hand; and I nodded silently. He rose, lightinga candle on a nearby table and holding it high before him as he opened the door.

“Come with me—upstairs.”

I dreaded to brave those musty corridors again, but fascination downed allmy qualms. The boards creaked beneath our feet, and I trembled once when I thought I saw a faint,rope-like line traced in the dust near the staircase.

The steps of the attic were noisy and rickety, with several of the treads missing.I was just glad of the need of looking sharply to my footing, for it gave me an excuse not toglance about. The attic corridor was pitch-black and heavily cobwebbed, and inch-deep with dustexcept where a beaten trail led to a door on the left at the farther end. As I noticed the rottingremains of a thick carpet I thought of the other feet which had pressed it in bygone decades—ofthese, and of one thing which did not have feet.

The old man took me straight to the door at the end of the beaten path, andfumbled a second with the rusty latch. I was acutely frightened now that I knew the picturewas so close, yet dared not retreat at this stage. In another moment my host was ushering meinto the deserted studio.

The candle light was very faint, yet served to shew most of the principal features.I noticed the low, slanting roof, the huge enlarged dormer, the curios and trophies hung onthe walls—and most of all, the great shrouded easel in the centre of the floor. To thateasel de Russy now walked, drawing aside the dusty velvet hangings on the side turned away fromme, and motioning me silently to approach. It took a good deal of courage to make me obey, especiallywhen I saw how my guide’s eyes dilated in the wavering candle light as he looked at theunveiled canvas. But again curiosity conquered everything, and I walked around to where de Russystood. Then I saw the damnable thing.

I did not faint—though no reader can possibly realise the effort it tookto keep me from doing so. I did cry out, but stopped short when I saw the frightened look onthe old man’s face. As I had expected, the canvas was warped, mouldy, and scabrous fromdampness and neglect; but for all that I could trace the monstrous hints of evil cosmic outsidenessthat lurked all through the nameless scene’s morbid content and perverted geometry.

It was as the old man had said—a vaulted, columned hell of mingled BlackMasses and Witches’ Sabbaths—and what perfect completion could have added to it wasbeyond my power to guess. Decay had only increased the utter hideousness of its wicked symbolismand diseased suggestion, for the parts most affected by time were just those parts of the picturewhich in Nature—or in that extra-cosmic realm that mocked Nature—would be apt to decayor disintegrate.

The utmost horror of all, of course, was Marceline—and as I saw the bloated,discoloured flesh I formed the odd fancy that perhaps the figure on the canvas had some obscure,occult linkage with the figure which lay in quicklime under the cellar floor. Perhaps the limehad preserved the corpse instead of destroying it—but could it have preserved those black,malign eyes that glared and mocked at me from their painted hell?

And there was something else about the creature which I could not fail to notice—somethingwhich de Russy had not been able to put into words, but which perhaps had something to do withDenis’ wish to kill all those of his blood who had dwelt under the same roof with her.Whether Marsh knew, or whether the genius in him painted it without his knowing, none couldsay. But Denis and his father could not have known till they saw the picture.

Surpassing all in horror was the streaming black hair—which covered therotting body, but which was itself not even slightly decayed. All I had heard of it wasamply verified. It was nothing human, this ropy, sinuous, half-oily, half-crinkly flood of serpentdarkness. Vile, independent life proclaimed itself at every unnatural twist and convolution,and the suggestion of numberless reptilian heads at the out-turned ends was far too markedto be illusory or accidental.

The blasphemous thing held me like a magnet. I was helpless, and did not wonderat the myth of the gorgon’s glance which turned all beholders to stone. Then I thoughtI saw a change come over the thing. The leering features perceptibly moved, so that the rottingjaw fell, allowing the thick, beast-like lips to disclose a row of pointed yellow fangs. Thepupils of the fiendish eyes dilated, and the eyes themselves seemed to bulge outward. And thehair—that accursed hair! It had begun to rustle and wave perceptibly, the snake-headsall turning toward de Russy and vibrating as if to strike!

Reason deserted me altogether, and before I knew what I was doing I drew myautomatic and sent a shower of twelve steel-jacketed bullets through the shocking canvas. Thewhole thing at once fell to pieces, even the frame toppling from the easel and clattering tothe dust-covered floor. But though this horror was shattered, another had risen before me inthe form of de Russy himself, whose maddened shrieks as he saw the picture vanish were almostas terrible as the picture itself had been.

With a half-articulate scream of “God, now you’ve done it!”the frantic old man seized me violently by the arm and commenced to drag me out of the roomand down the rickety stairs. He had dropped the candle in his panic; but dawn was near, andsome faint grey light was filtering in through the dust-covered windows. I tripped and stumbledrepeatedly, but never for a moment would my guide slacken his pace.

“Run!” he shrieked, “run for your life! You don’t knowwhat you’ve done! I never told you the whole thing! There were things I had to do—thepicture talked to me and told me. I had to guard and keep it—now the worst will happen!She and that hair will come up out of their graves, for God knows what purpose!

“Hurry, man! For God’s sake let’s get out of here while there’stime. If you have a car take me along to Cape Girardeau with you. It may get me in the end,anywhere, but I’ll give it a run for its money. Out of here—quick!”

As we reached the ground floor I became aware of a slow, curious thumping fromthe rear of the house, followed by a sound of a door shutting. De Russy had not heard the thumping,but the other noise caught his ear and drew from him the most terrible shriek that ever soundedin human throat.

“Oh, God—great God—that was the cellar door—she’scoming—”

By this time I was desperately wrestling with the rusty latch and sagging hingesof the great front door—almost as frantic as my host now that I heard the slow, thumpingtread approaching from the unknown rear rooms of the accursed mansion. The night’s rainhad warped the oaken planks, and the heavy door stuck and resisted even more strongly than ithad when I forced an entrance the evening before.

Somewhere a plank creaked beneath the foot of whatever was walking, and thesound seemed to snap the last cord of sanity in the poor old man. With a roar like that of amaddened bull he released his grip on me and made a plunge to the right, through the open doorof a room which I judged had been a parlour. A second later, just as I got the front door openand was making my own escape, I heard the tinkling clatter of broken glass and knew he had leaptthrough a window. And as I bounded off the sagging porch to commence my mad race down the long,weed-grown drive I thought I could catch the thud of dead, dogged footfalls which did not followme, but which kept leadenly on through the door of the cobwebbed parlour.

I looked backward only twice as I plunged heedlessly through the burrs andbriers of that abandoned drive, past the dying lindens and grotesque scrub-oaks, in the greypallor of a cloudy November dawn. The first time was when an acrid smell overtook me, and Ithought of the candle de Russy had dropped in the attic studio. By then I was comfortably nearthe road, on the high place from which the roof of the distant house was clearly visible aboveits encircling trees; and just as I expected, thick clouds of smoke were billowing out of theattic dormers and curling upward into the leaden heavens. I thanked the powers of creation thatan immemorial curse was about to be purged by fire and blotted from the earth.

But in the next instant came that second backward look in which I glimpsedtwo other things—things that cancelled most of the relief and gave me a supreme shock fromwhich I shall never recover. I have said that I was on a high part of the drive, from whichmuch of the plantation behind me was visible. This vista included not only the house and itstrees but some of the abandoned and partly flooded flat land beside the river, and several bendsof the weed-choked drive I had been so hastily traversing. In both of these latter places I nowbeheld sights—or suspicions of sights—which I wish devoutly I could deny.

It was a faint, distant scream which made me turn back again, and as I didso I caught a trace of motion on the dull grey marshy plain behind the house. At that distancehuman figures are very small, yet I thought the motion resolved itself into two of these—pursuerand pursued. I even thought I saw the dark-clothed leading figure overtaken and seized by thebald, naked figure in the rear—overtaken, seized, and dragged violently in the directionof the now burning house.

But I could not watch the outcome, for at once a nearer sight obtruded itself—asuggestion of motion among the underbrush at a point some distance back along the deserted drive.Unmistakably, the weeds and bushes and briers were swaying as no wind could sway them; swayingas if some large, swift serpent were wriggling purposefully along on the ground in pursuit ofme.

That was all I could stand. I scrambled along madly for the gate, heedlessof torn clothing and bleeding scratches, and jumped into the roadster parked under the greatevergreen tree. It was a bedraggled, rain-drenched sight; but the works were unharmed and Ihad no trouble in starting the thing. I went on blindly in the direction the car was headedfor; nothing was in my mind but to get away from that frightful region of nightmares and cacodaemons—toget away as quickly and as far as gasoline could take me.

About three or four miles along the road a farmer hailed me—a kindly,drawling fellow of middle age and considerable native intelligence. I was glad to slow downand ask directions, though I knew I must present a strange enough aspect. The man readily toldme the way to Cape Girardeau, and inquired where I had come from in such a state at such anearly hour. Thinking it best to say little, I merely mentioned that I had been caught in thenight’s rain and had taken shelter at a nearby farmhouse, afterward losing my way in theunderbrush trying to find my car.

“At a farmhouse, eh? Wonder whose it could a ben. Ain’t nothin’standin’ this side o’ Jim Ferris’ place acrost Barker’s Crick, an’that’s all o’ twenty miles by the rud.”

I gave a start, and wondered what fresh mystery this portended. Then I askedmy informant if he had overlooked the large ruined plantation house whose ancient gate borderedthe road not far back.

“Funny ye sh’d recolleck that, stranger! Must a ben here afore sometime. But that house ain’t there now. Burnt down five or six years ago—and they didtell some queer stories about it.”

I shuddered.

“You mean Riverside—ol’ man de Russy’s place. Queer goin’son there fifteen or twenty years ago. Ol’ man’s boy married a gal from abroad, andsome folks thought she was a mighty odd sort. Didn’t like the looks of her. Then she andthe boy went off sudden, and later on the ol’ man said he was kilt in the war. But someo’ the niggers hinted queer things. Got around at last that the ol’ fellow fell inlove with the gal himself and kilt her and the boy. That place was sure enough haunted by ablack snake, mean that what it may.

“Then five or six years ago the ol’ man disappeared and the houseburned down. Some do say he was burnt up in it. It was a mornin’ after a rainy night justlike this, when lots o’ folks heard an awful yellin’ acrost the fields in old de Russy’svoice. When they stopped and looked, they see the house goin’ up in smoke quick as a wink—thatplace was all like tinder anyhow, rain or no rain. Nobody never seen the ol’ man agin,but onct in a while they tell of the ghost of that big black snake glidin’ aroun’.

“What d’ye make of it, anyhow? You seem to hev knowed the place.Didn’t ye ever hear tell of the de Russys? What d’ye reckon was the trouble with thatgal young Denis married? She kinder made everybody shiver and feel hateful, though ye couldn’tnever tell why.”

I was trying to think, but that process was almost beyond me now. The houseburned down years ago? Then where, and under what conditions, had I passed the night? And whydid I know what I knew of these things? Even as I pondered I saw a hair on my coat sleeve—theshort, grey hair of an old man.

In the end I drove on without telling anything. But I did hint that gossipwas wronging the poor old planter who had suffered so much. I made it clear—as if fromdistant but authentic reports wafted among friends—that if anyone was to blame for thetrouble at Riverside it was the woman, Marceline. She was not suited to Missouri ways, I said,and it was too bad that Denis had ever married her.

More I did not intimate, for I felt that the de Russys, with their proudlycherished honour and high, sensitive spirits, would not wish me to say more. They had borneenough, God knows, without the countryside guessing what a daemon of the pit—what a gorgonof the elder blasphemies—had come to flaunt their ancient and stainless name.

Nor was it right that the neighbours should know that other horror which mystrange host of the night could not bring himself to tell me—that horror which he musthave learned, as I learned it, from details in the lost masterpiece of poor Frank Marsh.

It would be too hideous if they knew that the one-time heiress of Riverside—theaccursed gorgon or lamia whose hateful crinkly coil of serpent-hair must even now be broodingand twining vampirically around an artist’s skeleton in a lime-packed grave beneath a charredfoundation—was faintly, subtly, yet to the eyes of genius unmistakably the scion of Zimbabwe’smost primal grovellers. No wonder she owned a link with that old witch-woman Sophonisba—for,though in deceitfully slight proportion, Marceline was a negress.
