An Extemporaneous Sob Story

by Marcus Lollius, Proconsul of Gaul

Sheehan’s Pool Room, which adorns one of the lesser alleys in the heart of Chicago’sstockyard district, is not a nice place. Its air, freighted with a thousand odours such as Coleridgemay have found at Cologne, too seldom knows the purifying rays of the sun; but fights for spacewith the acrid fumes of unnumbered cheap cigars and cigarettes which dangle from the coarselips of unnumbered human animals that haunt the place day and night. But the popularity of Sheehan’sremains unimpaired; and for this there is a reason—a reason obvious to anyone who willtake the trouble to analyse the mixed stenches prevailing there. Over and above the fumes andsickening closeness rises an aroma once familiar throughout the land, but now happily banishedto the back streets of life by the edict of a benevolent government—the aroma of strong,wicked whiskey—a precious kind of forbidden fruit indeed in this year of grace 1950.

Sheehan’s is the acknowledged centre to Chicago’s subterraneantraffic in liquor and narcotics, and as such has a certain dignity which extends even to theunkempt attachés of the place; but there was until lately one who lay outside the paleof that dignity—one who shared the squalor and filth, but not the importance, of Sheehan’s.He was called “Old Bugs”, and was the most disreputable object in a disreputableenvironment. What he had once been, many tried to guess; for his language and mode of utterancewhen intoxicated to a certain degree were such as to excite wonderment; but what he was,presented less difficulty—for “Old Bugs”, in superlative degree, epitomisedthe pathetic species known as the “bum” or the “down-and-outer”. Whencehe had come, no one could tell. One night he had burst wildly into Sheehan’s, foamingat the mouth and screaming for whiskey and hasheesh; and having been supplied in exchange fora promise to perform odd jobs, had hung about ever since, mopping floors, cleaning cuspidorsand glasses, and attending to an hundred similar menial duties in exchange for the drink anddrugs which were necessary to keep him alive and sane.

He talked but little, and usually in the common jargon of the underworld; butoccasionally, when inflamed by an unusually generous dose of crude whiskey, would burst forthinto strings of incomprehensible polysyllables and snatches of sonorous prose and verse whichled certain habitués to conjecture that he had seen better days. One steady patron—abank defaulter under cover—came to converse with him quite regularly, and from the toneof his discourse ventured the opinion that he had been a writer or professor in his day. Butthe only tangible clue to Old Bugs’ past was a faded photograph which he constantly carriedabout with him—the photograph of a young woman of noble and beautiful features. This hewould sometimes draw from his tattered pocket, carefully unwrap from its covering of tissuepaper, and gaze upon for hours with an expression of ineffable sadness and tenderness. It wasnot the portrait of one whom an underworld denizen would be likely to know, but of a lady ofbreeding and quality, garbed in the quaint attire of thirty years before. Old Bugs himself seemedalso to belong to the past, for his nondescript clothing bore every hallmark of antiquity. Hewas a man of immense height, probably more than six feet, though his stooping shoulders sometimesbelied this fact. His hair, a dirty white and falling out in patches, was never combed; andover his lean face grew a mangy stubble of coarse beard which seemed always to remain at thebristling stage—never shaven—yet never long enough to form a respectable set ofwhiskers. His features had perhaps been noble once, but were now seamed with the ghastly effectsof terrible dissipation. At one time—probably in middle life—he had evidently beengrossly fat; but now he was horribly lean, the purple flesh hanging in loose pouches under hisbleary eyes and upon his cheeks. Altogether, Old Bugs was not pleasing to look upon.

The disposition of Old Bugs was as odd as his aspect. Ordinarily he was trueto the derelict type—ready to do anything for a nickel or a dose of whiskey or hasheesh—butat rare intervals he shewed the traits which earned him his name. Then he would try to straightenup, and a certain fire would creep into the sunken eyes. His demeanour would assume an unwontedgrace and even dignity; and the sodden creatures around him would sense something of superiority—somethingwhich made them less ready to give the usual kicks and cuffs to the poor butt and drudge. Atthese times he would shew a sardonic humour and make remarks which the folk of Sheehan’sdeemed foolish and irrational. But the spells would soon pass, and once more Old Bugs wouldresume his eternal floor-scrubbing and cuspidor-cleaning. But for one thing Old Bugs would havebeen an ideal slave to the establishment—and that one thing was his conduct when youngmen were introduced for their first drink. The old man would then rise from the floor in angerand excitement, muttering threats and warnings, and seeking to dissuade the novices from embarkingupon their course of “seeing life as it is”. He would sputter and fume, explodinginto sesquipedalian admonitions and strange oaths, and animated by a frightful earnestness whichbrought a shudder to more than one drug-racked mind in the crowded room. But after a time hisalcohol-enfeebled brain would wander from the subject, and with a foolish grin he would turnonce more to his mop or cleaning-rag.

I do not think that many of Sheehan’s regular patrons will ever forgetthe day that young Alfred Trever came. He was rather a “find”—a rich and high-spiritedyouth who would “go the limit” in anything he undertook—at least, that wasthe verdict of Pete Schultz, Sheehan’s “runner”, who had come acrossthe boy at Lawrence College, in the small town of Appleton, Wisconsin. Trever was the son ofprominent parents in Appleton. His father, Karl Trever, was an attorney and citizen of distinction,whilst his mother had made an enviable reputation as a poetess under her maiden name of EleanorWing. Alfred was himself a scholar and poet of distinction, though cursed with a certain childishirresponsibility which made him an ideal prey for Sheehan’s runner. He was blond, handsome,and spoiled; vivacious and eager to taste the several forms of dissipation about which he hadread and heard. At Lawrence he had been prominent in the mock-fraternity of “Tappa TappaKeg”, where he was the wildest and merriest of the wild and merry young roysterers; butthis immature, collegiate frivolity did not satisfy him. He knew deeper vices through books,and he now longed to know them at first hand. Perhaps this tendency toward wildness had beenstimulated somewhat by the repression to which he had been subjected at home; for Mrs. Treverhad particular reason for training her only child with rigid severity. She had, in her own youth,been deeply and permanently impressed with the horror of dissipation by the case of one to whomshe had for a time been engaged.

Young Galpin, the fiancé in question, had been one of Appleton’smost remarkable sons. Attaining distinction as a boy through his wonderful mentality, he wonvast fame at the University of Wisconsin, and at the age of twenty-three returned to Appleton to takeup a professorship at Lawrence and to slip a diamond upon the finger of Appleton’s fairestand most brilliant daughter. For a season all went happily, till without warning the storm burst.Evil habits, dating from a first drink taken years before in woodland seclusion, made themselvesmanifest in the young professor; and only by a hurried resignation did he escape a nasty prosecutionfor injury to the habits and morals of the pupils under his charge. His engagement broken, Galpinmoved east to begin life anew; but before long, Appletonians heard of his dismissal in disgracefrom New York University, where he had obtained an instructorship in English. Galpin now devotedhis time to the library and lecture platform, preparing volumes and speeches on various subjectsconnected with belles lettres, and always shewing a genius so remarkable that it seemedas if the public must sometime pardon him for his past mistakes. His impassioned lectures indefence of Villon, Poe, Verlaine, and Oscar Wilde were applied to himself as well, and in theshort Indian summer of his glory there was talk of a renewed engagement at a certain culturedhome on Park Avenue. But then the blow fell. A final disgrace, compared to which the othershad been as nothing, shattered the illusions of those who had come to believe in Galpin’sreform; and the young man abandoned his name and disappeared from public view. Rumour now andthen associated him with a certain “Consul Hasting” whose work for the stage andfor motion-picture companies attracted a certain degree of attention because of its scholarlybreadth and depth; but Hasting soon disappeared from the public eye, and Galpin became onlya name for parents to quote in warning accents. Eleanor Wing soon celebrated her marriage toKarl Trever, a rising young lawyer, and of her former admirer retained only enough memory todictate the naming of her only son, and the moral guidance of that handsome and headstrong youth.Now, in spite of all that guidance, Alfred Trever was at Sheehan’s and about to take hisfirst drink.

“Boss,” cried Schultz, as he entered the vile-smelling room withhis young victim, “meet my friend Al Trever, bes’ li’l’ sport up atLawrence—thas’ ’n Appleton, Wis., y’ know. Some swell guy, too—’sfather’s a big corp’ration lawyer up in his burg, ’n’ ’s mother’ssome lit’ry genius. He wants to see life as she is—wants to know what the real lightnin’juice tastes like—so jus’ remember he’s me friend an’ treat ’imright.”

As the names Trever, Lawrence, and Appleton fell on the air, the loafers seemedto sense something unusual. Perhaps it was only some sound connected with the clicking ballsof the pool tables or the rattling glasses that were brought from the cryptic regions in therear—perhaps only that, plus some strange rustling of the dirty draperies at the one dingywindow—but many thought that someone in the room had gritted his teeth and drawn a verysharp breath.

“Glad to know you, Sheehan,” said Trever in a quiet, well-bredtone. “This is my first experience in a place like this, but I am a student of life, anddon’t want to miss any experience. There’s poetry in this sort of thing, you know—orperhaps you don’t know, but it’s all the same.”

“Young feller,” responded the proprietor, “ya come tuh th’right place tuh see life. We got all kinds here—reel life an’ a good time. The damn’government can try tuh make folks good ef it wants tuh, but it can’t stop a feller fromhittin’ ’er up when he feels like it. Whaddya want, feller—booze, coke, orsome other sorta dope? Yuh can’t ask for nothin’ we ain’t got.”

Habitués say that it was at this point they noticed a cessation in theregular, monotonous strokes of the mop.

“I want whiskey—good old-fashioned rye!” exclaimed Treverenthusiastically. “I’ll tell you, I’m good and tired of water after readingof the merry bouts fellows used to have in the old days. I can’t read an Anacreontic withoutwatering at the mouth—and it’s something a lot stronger than water that my mouthwaters for!”

“Anacreontic—what ’n hell’s that?” several hangers-onlooked up as the young man went slightly beyond their depth. But the bank defaulter under coverexplained to them that Anacreon was a gay old dog who lived many years ago and wrote about thefun he had when all the world was just like Sheehan’s.

“Let me see, Trever,” continued the defaulter, “didn’tSchultz say your mother is a literary person, too?”

“Yes, damn it,” replied Trever, “but nothing like the oldTeian! She’s one of those dull, eternal moralisers that try to take all the joy out oflife. Namby-pamby sort—ever heard of her? She writes under her maiden name of EleanorWing.”

Here it was that Old Bugs dropped his mop.

“Well, here’s yer stuff,” announced Sheehan jovially as atray of bottles and glasses was wheeled into the room. “Good old rye, an’ as fieryas ya kin find anyw’eres in Chi’.”

The youth’s eyes glistened and his nostrils curled at the fumes of thebrownish fluid which an attendant was pouring out for him. It repelled him horribly, and revoltedall his inherited delicacy; but his determination to taste life to the full remained with him,and he maintained a bold front. But before his resolution was put to the test, the unexpectedintervened. Old Bugs, springing up from the crouching position in which he had hitherto been,leaped at the youth and dashed from his hands the uplifted glass, almost simultaneously attackingthe tray of bottles and glasses with his mop, and scattering the contents upon the floor ina confusion of odoriferous fluid and broken bottles and tumblers. Numbers of men, or thingswhich had been men, dropped to the floor and began lapping at the puddles of spilled liquor,but most remained immovable, watching the unprecedented actions of the barroom drudge and derelict.Old Bugs straightened up before the astonished Trever, and in a mild and cultivated voice said,“Do not do this thing. I was like you once, and I did it. Now I am like—this.”

“What do you mean, you damned old fool?” shouted Trever. “Whatdo you mean by interfering with a gentleman in his pleasures?”

Sheehan, now recovering from his astonishment, advanced and laid a heavy handon the old waif’s shoulder.

“This is the last time for you, old bird!” he exclaimed furiously.“When a gen’l’man wants tuh take a drink here, by God, he shall, without youinterferin’. Now get th’ hell outa here afore I kick hell outa ya.”

But Sheehan had reckoned without scientific knowledge of abnormal psychologyand the effects of nervous stimulus. Old Bugs, obtaining a firmer hold on his mop, began towield it like the javelin of a Macedonian hoplite, and soon cleared a considerable space aroundhimself, meanwhile shouting various disconnected bits of quotation, among which was prominentlyrepeated, “&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the sons of Belial, blown with insolence and wine.”

The room became pandemonium, and men screamed and howled in fright at the sinisterbeing they had aroused. Trever seemed dazed in the confusion, and shrank to the wall as thestrife thickened. “He shall not drink! He shall not drink!” Thus roared Old Bugsas he seemed to run out of—or rise above—quotations. Policemen appeared at the door,attracted by the noise, but for a time they made no move to intervene. Trever, now thoroughlyterrified and cured forever of his desire to see life via the vice route, edged closer to theblue-coated newcomers. Could he but escape and catch a train for Appleton, he reflected, hewould consider his education in dissipation quite complete.

Then suddenly Old Bugs ceased to wield his javelin and stopped still—drawinghimself up more erectly than any denizen of the place had ever seen him before. “Ave,Caesar, moriturus te saluto!” he shouted, and dropped to the whiskey-reeking floor,never to rise again.

Subsequent impressions will never leave the mind of young Trever. The pictureis blurred, but ineradicable. Policemen ploughed a way through the crowd, questioning everyoneclosely both about the incident and about the dead figure on the floor. Sheehan especially didthey ply with inquiries, yet without eliciting any information of value concerning Old Bugs.Then the bank defaulter remembered the picture, and suggested that it be viewed and filed foridentification at police headquarters. An officer bent reluctantly over the loathsome glassy-eyedform and found the tissue-wrapped cardboard, which he passed around among the others.

“Some chicken!” leered a drunken man as he viewed the beautifulface, but those who were sober did not leer, looking with respect and abashment at the delicateand spiritual features. No one seemed able to place the subject, and all wondered that the drug-degradedderelict should have such a portrait in his possession—that is, all but the bank defaulter,who was meanwhile eyeing the intruding bluecoats rather uneasily. He had seen a littledeeper beneath Old Bugs’ mask of utter degradation.

Then the picture was passed to Trever, and a change came over the youth. Afterthe first start, he replaced the tissue wrapping around the portrait, as if to shield it fromthe sordidness of the place. Then he gazed long and searchingly at the figure on the floor,noting its great height, and the aristocratic cast of features which seemed to appear now thatthe wretched flame of life had flickered out. No, he said hastily, as the question was put tohim, he did not know the subject of the picture. It was so old, he added, that no one now couldbe expected to recognise it.

But Alfred Trever did not speak the truth, as many guessed when he offeredto take charge of the body and secure its interment in Appleton. Over the library mantel inhis home hung the exact replica of that picture, and all his life he had known and loved itsoriginal.

For the gentle and noble features were those of his own mother.
