(Ms. found among the effects of the late Richard H. Johnson, Ph.D., curator of theCabot Museum of Archaeology, Boston, Mass.)I.

It is not likely that anyone in Boston—or any alert reader elsewhere—will ever forgetthe strange affair of the Cabot Museum. The newspaper publicity given to that hellish mummy,the antique and terrible rumours vaguely linked with it, the morbid wave of interest and cultactivities during 1932, and the frightful fate of the two intruders on December 1st of thatyear, all combined to form one of those classic mysteries which go down for generations as folkloreand become the nuclei of whole cycles of horrific speculation.

Everyone seems to realise, too, that something very vital and unutterably hideouswas suppressed in the public accounts of the culminant horrors. Those first disquieting hintsas to the condition of one of the two bodies were dismissed and ignored tooabruptly—nor were the singular modifications in the mummy given the following-up whichtheir news value would normally prompt. It also struck people as queer that the mummy was neverrestored to its case. In these days of expert taxidermy the excuse that its disintegratingcondition made exhibition impracticable seemed a peculiarly lame one.

As curator of the museum I am in a position to reveal all the suppressed facts,but this I shall not do during my lifetime. There are things about the world and universe whichit is better for the majority not to know, and I have not departed from the opinion in whichall of us—museum staff, physicians, reporters, and police—concurred at the periodof the horror itself. At the same time it seems proper that a matter of such overwhelming scientificand historic importance should not remain wholly unrecorded—hence this account which Ihave prepared for the benefit of serious students. I shall place it among various papers tobe examined after my death, leaving its fate to the discretion of my executors. Certain threatsand unusual events during the past weeks have led me to believe that my life—as well asthat of other museum officials—is in some peril through the enmity of several widespreadsecret cults of Asiatics, Polynesians, and heterogeneous mystical devotees; hence it is possiblethat the work of the executors may not be long postponed. [Executor’s note: Dr. Johnsondied suddenly and rather mysteriously of heart-failure on April 22, 1933. Wentworth Moore, taxidermistof the museum, disappeared around the middle of the preceding month. On February 18 of the sameyear Dr. William Minot, who superintended a dissection connected with the case, was stabbedin the back, dying the following day.]

The real beginning of the horror, I suppose, was in 1879—long before myterm as curator—when the museum acquired that ghastly, inexplicable mummy from the OrientShipping Company. Its very discovery was monstrous and menacing, for it came from a crypt ofunknown origin and fabulous antiquity on a bit of land suddenly upheaved from the Pacific’sfloor.

On May 11, 1878, Capt. Charles Weatherbee of the freighter Eridanus,bound from Wellington, New Zealand, to Valparaiso, Chile, had sighted a new island unmarkedon any chart and evidently of volcanic origin. It projected quite boldly out of the sea in theform of a truncated cone. A landing-party under Capt. Weatherbee noted evidences of long submersionon the rugged slopes which they climbed, while at the summit there were signs of recent destruction,as by an earthquake. Among the scattered rubble were massive stones of manifestly artificialshaping, and a little examination disclosed the presence of some of that prehistoric Cyclopeanmasonry found on certain Pacific islands and forming a perpetual archaeological puzzle.

Finally the sailors entered a massive stone crypt—judged to have beenpart of a much larger edifice, and to have originally lain far underground—in one cornerof which the frightful mummy crouched. After a short period of virtual panic, caused partlyby certain carvings on the walls, the men were induced to move the mummy to the ship, thoughit was only with fear and loathing that they touched it. Close to the body, as if once thrustinto its clothes, was a cylinder of an unknown metal containing a roll of thin, bluish-whitemembrane of equally unknown nature, inscribed with peculiar characters in a greyish, indeterminablepigment. In the centre of the vast stone floor was a suggestion of a trap-door, but the partylacked apparatus sufficiently powerful to move it.

The Cabot Museum, then newly established, saw the meagre reports of the discoveryand at once took steps to acquire the mummy and the cylinder. Curator Pickman made a personaltrip to Valparaiso and outfitted a schooner to search for the crypt where the thing had beenfound, though meeting with failure in this matter. At the recorded position of the island nothingbut the sea’s unbroken expanse could be discerned, and the seekers realised that the sameseismic forces which had suddenly thrust the island up had carried it down again to the waterydarkness where it had brooded for untold aeons. The secret of that immovable trap-door wouldnever be solved. The mummy and the cylinder, however, remained—and the former was placedon exhibition early in November, 1879, in the museum’s hall of mummies.

The Cabot Museum of Archaeology, which specialises in such remnants of ancientand unknown civilisations as do not fall within the domain of art, is a small and scarcely famousinstitution, though one of high standing in scientific circles. It stands in the heart ofBoston’s exclusive Beacon Hill district—in Mt. Vernon Street, near Joy—housed ina former private mansion with an added wing in the rear, and was a source of pride to its austereneighbours until the recent terrible events brought it an undesirable notoriety.

The hall of mummies on the western side of the original mansion (which wasdesigned by Bulfinch and erected in 1819), on the second floor, is justly esteemed by historiansand anthropologists as harbouring the greatest collection of its kind in America. Here may befound typical examples of Egyptian embalming from the earliest Sakkarah specimens to the lastCoptic attempts of the eighth century; mummies of other cultures, including the prehistoricIndian specimens recently found in the Aleutian Islands; agonised Pompeian figures moulded inplaster from tragic hollows in the ruin-choking ashes; naturally mummified bodies from minesand other excavations in all parts of the earth—some surprised by their terrible entombmentin the grotesque postures caused by their last, tearing death-throes—everything, in short,which any collection of the sort could well be expected to contain. In 1879, of course, it wasmuch less ample than it is now; yet even then it was remarkable. But that shocking thing fromthe primal Cyclopean crypt on an ephemeral sea-spawned island was always its chief attractionand most impenetrable mystery.

The mummy was that of a medium-sized man of unknown race, and was cast in apeculiar crouching posture. The face, half shielded by claw-like hands, had its under jaw thrustfar forward, while the shrivelled features bore an expression of fright so hideous that fewspectators could view them unmoved. The eyes were closed, with lids clamped down tightly overeyeballs apparently bulging and prominent. Bits of hair and beard remained, and the colour ofthe whole was a sort of dull neutral grey. In texture the thing was half leathery and half stony,forming an insoluble enigma to those experts who sought to ascertain how it was embalmed. Inplaces bits of its substance were eaten away by time and decay. Rags of some peculiar fabric,with suggestions of unknown designs, still clung to the object.

Just what made it so infinitely horrible and repulsive one could hardly say.For one thing, there was a subtle, indefinable sense of limitless antiquity and utter alienagewhich affected one like a view from the brink of a monstrous abyss of unplumbed blackness—butmostly it was the expression of crazed fear on the puckered, prognathous, half-shielded face.Such a symbol of infinite, inhuman, cosmic fright could not help communicating the emotion tothe beholder amidst a disquieting cloud of mystery and vain conjecture.

Among the discriminating few who frequented the Cabot Museum this relic ofan elder, forgotten world soon acquired an unholy fame, though the institution’s seclusionand quiet policy prevented it from becoming a popular sensation of the “Cardiff Giant”sort. In the last century the art of vulgar ballyhoo had not invaded the field of scholarshipto the extent it has now succeeded in doing. Naturally, savants of various kinds tried theirbest to classify the frightful object, though always without success. Theories of a bygone Pacificcivilisation, of which the Easter Island images and the megalithic masonry of Ponape and Nan-Matolare conceivable vestiges, were freely circulated among students, and learned journals carriedvaried and often conflicting speculations on a possible former continent whose peaks surviveas the myriad islands of Melanesia and Polynesia. The diversity in dates assigned to the hypotheticalvanished culture—or continent—was at once bewildering and amusing; yet some surprisinglyrelevant allusions were found in certain myths of Tahiti and other islands.

Meanwhile the strange cylinder and its baffling scroll of unknown hieroglyphs,carefully preserved in the museum library, received their due share of attention. No questioncould exist as to their association with the mummy; hence all realised that in the unravellingof their mystery the mystery of the shrivelled horror would in all probability be unravelledas well. The cylinder, about four inches long by seven-eighths of an inch in diameter, was ofa queerly iridescent metal utterly defying chemical analysis and seemingly impervious to allreagents. It was tightly fitted with a cap of the same substance, and bore engraved figuringsof an evidently decorative and possibly symbolic nature—conventional designs which seemedto follow a peculiarly alien, paradoxical, and doubtfully describable system of geometry.

Not less mysterious was the scroll it contained—a neat roll of some thin,bluish-white, unanalysable membrane, coiled round a slim rod of metal like that of the cylinder,and unwinding to a length of some two feet. The large, bold hieroglyphs, extending in a narrowline down the centre of the scroll and penned or painted with a grey pigment defying analysis,resembled nothing known to linguists and palaeographers, and could not be deciphered despitethe transmission of photographic copies to every living expert in the given field.

It is true that a few scholars, unusually versed in the literature of occultismand magic, found vague resemblances between some of the hieroglyphs and certain primal symbolsdescribed or cited in two or three very ancient, obscure, and esoteric texts such as the Book of Eibon, reputed to descend from forgotten Hyperborea; the Pnakotic fragments, allegedto be pre-human; and the monstrous and forbidden Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred.None of these resemblances, however, was beyond dispute; and because of the prevailing low estimationof occult studies, no effort was made to circulate copies of the hieroglyphs among mysticalspecialists. Had such circulation occurred at this early date, the later history of the casemight have been very different; indeed, a glance at the hieroglyphs by any reader of von Junzt’shorrible Nameless Cults would have established a linkage of unmistakable significance.At this period, however, the readers of that monstrous blasphemy were exceedingly few; copieshaving been incredibly scarce in the interval between the suppression of the original Düsseldorfedition (1839) and of the Bridewell translation (1845) and the publication of the expurgatedreprint by the Golden Goblin Press in 1909. Practically speaking, no occultist or student ofthe primal past’s esoteric lore had his attention called to the strange scroll until therecent outburst of sensational journalism which precipitated the horrible climax.

II.

Thus matters glided along for a half-century following the installation ofthe frightful mummy at the museum. The gruesome object had a local celebrity among cultivatedBostonians, but no more than that; while the very existence of the cylinder and scroll—aftera decade of futile research—was virtually forgotten. So quiet and conservative was theCabot Museum that no reporter or feature writer ever thought of invading its uneventful precinctsfor rabble-tickling material.

The invasion of ballyhoo commenced in the spring of 1931, when a purchase ofsomewhat spectacular nature—that of the strange objects and inexplicably preserved bodiesfound in crypts beneath the almost vanished and evilly famous ruins of Château Faussesflammes,in Averoigne, France—brought the museum prominently into the news columns. True to its“hustling” policy, the Boston Pillar sent a Sunday feature writer to coverthe incident and pad it with an exaggerated general account of the institution itself; and thisyoung man—Stuart Reynolds by name—hit upon the nameless mummy as a potential sensationfar surpassing the recent acquisitions nominally forming his chief assignment. A smatteringof theosophical lore, and a fondness for the speculations of such writers as Colonel Churchwardand Lewis Spence concerning lost continents and primal forgotten civilisations, made Reynoldsespecially alert toward any aeonian relic like the unknown mummy.

At the museum the reporter made himself a nuisance through constant and notalways intelligent questionings and endless demands for the movement of encased objects to permitphotographs from unusual angles. In the basement library room he pored endlessly over the strangemetal cylinder and its membraneous scroll, photographing them from every angle and securingpictures of every bit of the weird hieroglyphed text. He likewise asked to see all books withany bearing whatever on the subject of primal cultures and sunken continents—sitting forthree hours taking notes, and leaving only in order to hasten to Cambridge for a sight (if permissionwere granted) of the abhorred and forbidden Necronomicon at the Widener Library.

On April 5th the article appeared in the Sunday Pillar, smothered inphotographs of mummy, cylinder, and hieroglyphed scroll, and couched in the peculiarly simpering,infantile style which the Pillar affects for the benefit of its vast and mentally immatureclientele. Full of inaccuracies, exaggerations, and sensationalism, it was precisely the sortof thing to stir the brainless and fickle interest of the herd—and as a result the oncequiet museum began to be swarmed with chattering and vacuously staring throngs such as its statelycorridors had never known before.

There were scholarly and intelligent visitors, too, despite the puerility ofthe article—the pictures had spoken for themselves—and many persons of mature attainmentssometimes see the Pillar by accident. I recall one very strange character who appearedduring November—a dark, turbaned, and bushily bearded man with a laboured, unnatural voice,curiously expressionless face, clumsy hands covered with absurd white mittens, who gave a squalidWest End address and called himself “Swami Chandraputra”. This fellow was unbelievablyerudite in occult lore and seemed profoundly and solemnly moved by the resemblance of the hieroglyphson the scroll to certain signs and symbols of a forgotten elder world about which he professedvast intuitive knowledge.

By June, the fame of the mummy and scroll had leaked far beyond Boston, andthe museum had inquiries and requests for photographs from occultists and students of arcanaall over the world. This was not altogether pleasing to our staff, since we are a scientificinstitution without sympathy for fantastic dreamers; yet we answered all questions with civility.One result of these catechisms was a highly learned article in The Occult Review by thefamous New Orleans mystic Etienne-Laurent de Marigny, in which was asserted the complete identityof some of the odd geometrical designs on the iridescent cylinder, and of several of the hieroglyphson the membraneous scroll, with certain ideographs of horrible significance (transcribed fromprimal monoliths or from the secret rituals of hidden bands of esoteric students and devotees)reproduced in the hellish and suppressed Black Book or Nameless Cults of von Junzt.

De Marigny recalled the frightful death of von Junzt in 1840, a year afterthe publication of his terrible volume at Düsseldorf, and commented on his blood-curdling andpartly suspected sources of information. Above all, he emphasised the enormous relevance ofthe tales with which von Junzt linked most of the monstrous ideographs he had reproduced. Thatthese tales, in which a cylinder and scroll were expressly mentioned, held a remarkable suggestionof relationship to the things at the museum, no one could deny; yet they were of such breath-takingextravagance—involving such unbelievable sweeps of time and such fantastic anomalies ofa forgotten elder world—that one could much more easily admire than believe them.

Admire them the public certainly did, for copying in the press was universal.Illustrated articles sprang up everywhere, telling or purporting to tell the legends in theBlack Book, expatiating on the horror of the mummy, comparing the cylinder’s designsand the scroll’s hieroglyphs with the figures reproduced by von Junzt, and indulging inthe wildest, most sensational, and most irrational theories and speculations. Attendance atthe museum was trebled, and the widespread nature of the interest was attested by the plethoraof mail on the subject—most of it inane and superfluous—received at the museum. Apparentlythe mummy and its origin formed—for imaginative people—a close rival to the depressionas chief topic of 1931 and 1932. For my own part, the principal effect of the furore was tomake me read von Junzt’s monstrous volume in the Golden Goblin edition—a perusal whichleft me dizzy and nauseated, yet thankful that I had not seen the utter infamy of the unexpurgatedtext.

III.

The archaic whispers reflected in the Black Book, and linked with designsand symbols so closely akin to what the mysterious scroll and cylinder bore, were indeed ofa character to hold one spellbound and not a little awestruck. Leaping an incredible gulf oftime—behind all the civilisations, races, and lands we know—they clustered round avanished nation and a vanished continent of the misty, fabulous dawn-years&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.that to which legend has given the name of Mu, and which old tablets in the primal Naacal tonguespeak of as flourishing 200,000 years ago, when Europe harboured only hybrid entities, and lostHyperborea knew the nameless worship of black amorphous Tsathoggua.

There was mention of a kingdom or province called K’naa in a very ancientland where the first human people had found monstrous ruins left by those who had dwelt therebefore—vague waves of unknown entities which had filtered down from the stars and livedout their aeons on a forgotten, nascent world. K’naa was a sacred place, since from itsmidst the bleak basalt cliffs of Mount Yaddith-Gho soared starkly into the sky, topped by agigantic fortress of Cyclopean stone, infinitely older than mankind and built by the alien spawnof the dark planet Yuggoth, which had colonised the earth before the birth of terrestrial life.

The spawn of Yuggoth had perished aeons before, but had left behind them onemonstrous and terrible living thing which could never die—their hellish god or patron daemonGhatanothoa, which lowered and brooded eternally though unseen in the crypts beneath that fortresson Yaddith-Gho. No human creature had ever climbed Yaddith-Gho or seen that blasphemous fortressexcept as a distant and geometrically abnormal outline against the sky; yet most agreed thatGhatanothoa was still there, wallowing and burrowing in unsuspected abysses beneath the megalithicwalls. There were always those who believed that sacrifices must be made to Ghatanothoa, lestit crawl out of its hidden abysses and waddle horribly through the world of men as it had oncewaddled through the primal world of the Yuggoth-spawn.

People said that if no victims were offered, Ghatanothoa would ooze up to thelight of day and lumber down the basalt cliffs of Yaddith-Gho bringing doom to all it mightencounter. For no living thing could behold Ghatanothoa, or even a perfect graven image of Ghatanothoa,however small, without suffering a change more horrible than death itself. Sight of the god,or its image, as all the legends of the Yuggoth-spawn agreed, meant paralysis and petrifactionof a singularly shocking sort, in which the victim was turned to stone and leather on the outside,while the brain within remained perpetually alive—horribly fixed and prisoned through theages, and maddeningly conscious of the passage of interminable epochs of helpless inaction tillchance and time might complete the decay of the petrified shell and leave it exposed to die.Most brains, of course, would go mad long before this aeon-deferred release could arrive. Nohuman eyes, it was said, had ever glimpsed Ghatanothoa, though the danger was as great now asit had been for the Yuggoth-spawn.

And so there was a cult in K’naa which worshipped Ghatanothoa and eachyear sacrificed to it twelve young warriors and twelve young maidens. These victims were offeredup on flaming altars in the marble temple near the mountain’s base, for none dared climbYaddith-Gho’s basalt cliffs or draw near to the Cyclopean pre-human stronghold on its crest.Vast was the power of the priests of Ghatanothoa, since upon them alone depended the preservationof K’naa and of all the land of Mu from the petrifying emergence of Ghatanothoa out ofits unknown burrows.

There were in the land an hundred priests of the Dark God, under Imash-Mo theHigh-Priest, who walked before King Thabon at the Nath-feast, and stood proudly whilst the Kingknelt at the Dhoric shrine. Each priest had a marble house, a chest of gold, two hundred slaves,and an hundred concubines, besides immunity from civil law and the power of life and death overall in K’naa save the priests of the King. Yet in spite of these defenders there was evera fear in the land lest Ghatanothoa slither up from the depths and lurch viciously down themountain to bring horror and petrification to mankind. In the latter years the priests forbademen even to guess or imagine what its frightful aspect might be.

It was in the Year of the Red Moon (estimated as B. C. 173,148 by von Junzt)that a human being first dared to breathe defiance against Ghatanothoa and its nameless menace.This bold heretic was T’yog, High-Priest of Shub-Niggurath and guardian of the copper templeof the Goat with a Thousand Young. T’yog had thought long on the powers of the variousgods, and had had strange dreams and revelations touching the life of this and earlier worlds.In the end he felt sure that the gods friendly to man could be arrayed against the hostile gods,and believed that Shub-Niggurath, Nug, and Yeb, as well as Yig the Serpent-god, were ready totake sides with man against the tyranny and presumption of Ghatanothoa.

Inspired by the Mother Goddess, T’yog wrote down a strange formula inthe hieratic Naacal of his order, which he believed would keep the possessor immune from theDark God’s petrifying power. With this protection, he reflected, it might be possible fora bold man to climb the dreaded basalt cliffs and—first of all human beings—enterthe Cyclopean fortress beneath which Ghatanothoa reputedly brooded. Face to face with the god,and with the power of Shub-Niggurath and her sons on his side, T’yog believed that he mightbe able to bring it to terms and at last deliver mankind from its brooding menace. With humanityfreed through his efforts, there would be no limits to the honours he might claim. All the honoursof the priests of Ghatanothoa would perforce be transferred to him; and even kingship or godhoodmight conceivably be within his reach.

So T’yog wrote his protective formula on a scroll of pthagon membrane(according to von Junzt, the inner skin of the extinct yakith-lizard) and enclosed it in a carvencylinder of lagh metal—the metal brought by the Elder Ones from Yuggoth, and foundin no mine of earth. This charm, carried in his robe, would make him proof against the menaceof Ghatanothoa—it would even restore the Dark God’s petrified victims if that monstrousentity should ever emerge and begin its devastations. Thus he proposed to go up the shunnedand man-untrodden mountain, invade the alien-angled citadel of Cyclopean stone, and confrontthe shocking devil-entity in its lair. Of what would follow, he could not even guess; but thehope of being mankind’s saviour lent strength to his will.

He had, however, reckoned without the jealousy and self-interest of Ghatanothoa’spampered priests. No sooner did they hear of his plan than—fearful for their prestige andprivilege in case the Daemon-God should be dethroned—they set up a frantic clamour againstthe so-called sacrilege, crying that no man might prevail against Ghatanothoa, and that anyeffort to seek it out would merely provoke it to a hellish onslaught against mankind which nospell or priestcraft could hope to avert. With those cries they hoped to turn the public mindagainst T’yog; yet such was the people’s yearning for freedom from Ghatanothoa, andsuch their confidence in the skill and zeal of T’yog, that all the protestations came tonaught. Even the King, usually a puppet of the priests, refused to forbid T’yog’sdaring pilgrimage.

It was then that the priests of Ghatanothoa did by stealth what they couldnot do openly. One night Imash-Mo, the High-Priest, stole to T’yog in his temple chamberand took from his sleeping form the metal cylinder; silently drawing out the potent scroll andputting in its place another scroll of great similitude, yet varied enough to have no poweragainst any god or daemon. When the cylinder was slipped back into the sleeper’s cloakImash-Mo was content, for he knew T’yog was little likely to study that cylinder’scontents again. Thinking himself protected by the true scroll, the heretic would march up theforbidden mountain and into the Evil Presence—and Ghatanothoa, unchecked by any magic,would take care of the rest.

It would no longer be needful for Ghatanothoa’s priests to preach againstthe defiance. Let T’yog go his way and meet his doom. And secretly, the priests would alwayscherish the stolen scroll—the true and potent charm—handing it down from one High-Priestto another for use in any dim future when it might be needful to contravene the Devil-God’swill. So the rest of the night Imash-Mo slept in great peace, with the true scroll in a newcylinder fashioned for its harbourage.

It was dawn on the Day of the Sky-Flames (nomenclature undefined by von Junzt)that T’yog, amidst the prayers and chanting of the people and with King Thabon’s blessingon his head, started up the dreaded mountain with a staff of tlath-wood in his right hand. Withinhis robe was the cylinder holding what he thought to be the true charm—for he had indeedfailed to find out the imposture. Nor did he see any irony in the prayers which Imash-Mo andthe other priests of Ghatanothoa intoned for his safety and success.

All that morning the people stood and watched as T’yog’s dwindlingform struggled up the shunned basalt slope hitherto alien to men’s footsteps, and manystayed watching long after he had vanished where a perilous ledge led round to the mountain’shidden side. That night a few sensitive dreamers thought they heard a faint tremor convulsingthe hated peak; though most ridiculed them for the statement. Next day vast crowds watched themountain and prayed, and wondered how soon T’yog would return. And so the next day, andthe next. For weeks they hoped and waited, and then they wept. Nor did anyone ever see T’yog,who would have saved mankind from fears, again.

Thereafter men shuddered at T’yog’s presumption, and tried not tothink of the punishment his impiety had met. And the priests of Ghatanothoa smiled to thosewho might resent the god’s will or challenge its right to the sacrifices. In later yearsthe ruse of Imash-Mo became known to the people; yet the knowledge availed not to change thegeneral feeling that Ghatanothoa were better left alone. None ever dared to defy it again. Andso the ages rolled on, and King succeeded King, and High-Priest succeeded High-Priest, and nationsrose and decayed, and lands rose above the sea and returned into the sea. And with many millenniadecay fell upon K’naa—till at last on a hideous day of storm and thunder, terrificrumbling, and mountain-high waves, all the land of Mu sank into the sea forever.

Yet down the later aeons thin streams of ancient secrets trickled. In distantlands there met together grey-faced fugitives who had survived the sea-fiend’s rage, andstrange skies drank the smoke of altars reared to vanished gods and daemons. Though none knewto what bottomless deep the sacred peak and Cyclopean fortress of dreaded Ghatanothoa had sunk,there were still those who mumbled its name and offered to it nameless sacrifices lest it bubbleup through leagues of ocean and shamble among men spreading horror and petrifaction.

Around the scattered priests grew the rudiments of a dark and secret cult—secretbecause the people of the new lands had other gods and devils, and thought only evil of elderand alien ones—and within that cult many hideous things were done, and many strange objectscherished. It was whispered that a certain line of elusive priests still harboured the truecharm against Ghatanothoa which Imash-Mo stole from the sleeping T’yog; though none remainedwho could read or understand the cryptic syllables, or who could even guess in what part ofthe world the lost K’naa, the dreaded peak of Yaddith-Gho, and the titan fortress of theDevil-God had lain.

Though it flourished chiefly in those Pacific regions around which Mu itselfhad once stretched, there were rumours of the hidden and detested cult of Ghatanothoa in ill-fatedAtlantis, and on the abhorred plateau of Leng. Von Junzt implied its presence in the fabledsubterrene kingdom of K’n-yan, and gave clear evidence that it had penetrated Egypt, Chaldaea,Persia, China, the forgotten Semite empires of Africa, and Mexico and Peru in the New World.That it had a strong connexion with the witchcraft movement in Europe, against which the bullsof popes were vainly directed, he more than strongly hinted. The West, however, was never favourableto its growth; and public indignation—aroused by glimpses of hideous rites and namelesssacrifices—wholly stamped out many of its branches. In the end it became a hunted, doublyfurtive underground affair—yet never could its nucleus be quite exterminated. It alwayssurvived somehow, chiefly in the Far East and on the Pacific Islands, where its teachings becamemerged into the esoteric lore of the Polynesian Areoi.

Von Junzt gave subtle and disquieting hints of actual contact with the cult;so that as I read I shuddered at what was rumoured about his death. He spoke of the growth ofcertain ideas regarding the appearance of the Devil-God—a creature which no human being(unless it were the too-daring T’yog, who had never returned) had ever seen—and contrastedthis habit of speculation with the taboo prevailing in ancient Mu against any attempt to imaginewhat the horror looked like. There was a peculiar fearfulness about the devotees’ awedand fascinated whispers on this subject—whispers heavy with morbid curiosity concerningthe precise nature of what T’yog might have confronted in that frightful pre-human edificeon the dreaded and now-sunken mountains before the end (if it was an end) finally came—andI felt oddly disturbed by the German scholar’s oblique and insidious references to thistopic.

Scarcely less disturbing were von Junzt’s conjectures on the whereaboutsof the stolen scroll of cantrips against Ghatanothoa, and on the ultimate uses to which thisscroll might be put. Despite all my assurance that the whole matter was purely mythical, I couldnot help shivering at the notion of a latter-day emergence of the monstrous god, and at thepicture of an humanity turned suddenly to a race of abnormal statues, each encasing a livingbrain doomed to inert and helpless consciousness for untold aeons of futurity. The old Düsseldorfsavant had a poisonous way of suggesting more than he stated, and I could understand why hisdamnable book was suppressed in so many countries as blasphemous, dangerous, and unclean.

I writhed with repulsion, yet the thing exerted an unholy fascination; andI could not lay it down till I had finished it. The alleged reproductions of designs and ideographsfrom Mu were marvellously and startlingly like the markings on the strange cylinder and thecharacters on the scroll, and the whole account teemed with details having vague, irritatingsuggestions of resemblance to things connected with the hideous mummy. The cylinder and scroll—thePacific setting—the persistent notion of old Capt. Weatherbee that the Cyclopean cryptwhere the mummy was found had once lain under a vast building&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. somehow Iwas vaguely glad that the volcanic island had sunk before that massive suggestion of a trap-doorcould be opened.

IV.

What I read in the Black Book formed a fiendishly apt preparation forthe news items and closer events which began to force themselves upon me in the spring of 1932.I can scarcely recall just when the increasingly frequent reports of police action against theodd and fantastical religious cults in the Orient and elsewhere commenced to impress me; butby May or June I realised that there was, all over the world, a surprising and unwonted burstof activity on the part of bizarre, furtive, and esoteric mystical organisations ordinarilyquiescent and seldom heard from.

It is not likely that I would have connected these reports with either thehints of von Junzt or the popular furore over the mummy and cylinder in the museum, but forcertain significant syllables and persistent resemblances—sensationally dwelt upon by thepress—in the rites and speeches of the various secret celebrants brought to public attention.As it was, I could not help remarking with disquiet the frequent recurrence of a name—invarious corrupt forms—which seemed to constitute a focal point of all the cult worship,and which was obviously regarded with a singular mixture of reverence and terror. Some of theforms quoted were G’tanta, Tanotah, Than-Tha, Gatan, and Ktan-Tah—and it did not requirethe suggestions of my now numerous occultist correspondents to make me see in these variantsa hideous and suggestive kinship to the monstrous name rendered by von Junzt as Ghatanothoa.

There were other disquieting features, too. Again and again the reports citedvague, awestruck references to a “true scroll”—something on which tremendousconsequences seemed to hinge, and which was mentioned as being in the custody of a certain “Nagob”,whoever and whatever he might be. Likewise, there was an insistent repetition of a name whichsounded like Tog, Tiok, Yog, Zob, or Yob, and which my more and more excited consciousness involuntarilylinked with the name of the hapless heretic T’yog as given in the Black Book. Thisname was usually uttered in connexion with such cryptical phrases as “It is none otherthan he”, “He had looked upon its face”, “He knows all, though he can neithersee nor feel”, “He has brought the memory down through the aeons”, “Thetrue scroll will release him”, “Nagob has the true scroll”, “He can tellwhere to find it”.

Something very queer was undoubtedly in the air, and I did not wonder whenmy occultist correspondents, as well as the sensational Sunday papers, began to connect thenew abnormal stirrings with the legends of Mu on the one hand, and with the frightful mummy’srecent exploitation on the other hand. The widespread articles in the first wave of press publicity,with their insistent linkage of the mummy, cylinder, and scroll with the tale in the BlackBook, and their crazily fantastic speculations about the whole matter, might very well haveroused the latent fanaticism in hundreds of those furtive groups of exotic devotees with whichour complex world abounds. Nor did the papers cease adding fuel to the flames—for the storieson the cult-stirrings were even wilder than the earlier series of yarns.

As the summer drew on, attendants noticed a curious new element among the throngsof visitors which—after a lull following the first burst of publicity—were again drawnto the museum by the second furore. More and more frequently there were persons of strange andexotic aspect—swarthy Asiatics, long-haired nondescripts, and bearded brown men who seemedunused to European clothes—who would invariably inquire for the hall of mummies and wouldsubsequently be found staring at the hideous Pacific specimen in a veritable ecstasy of fascination.Some quiet, sinister undercurrent in this flood of eccentric foreigners seemed to impress allthe guards, and I myself was far from undisturbed. I could not help thinking of the prevailingcult-stirrings among just such exotics as these—and the connexion of those stirrings withmyths all too close to the frightful mummy and its cylinder scroll.

At times I was half tempted to withdraw the mummy from exhibition—especiallywhen an attendant told me that he had several times glimpsed strangers making odd obeisancesbefore it, and had overheard sing-song mutterings which sounded like chants or rituals addressedto it at hours when the visiting throngs were somewhat thinned. One of the guards acquired aqueer nervous hallucination about the petrified horror in the lone glass case, alleging thathe could see from day to day certain vague, subtle, and infinitely slight changes in the franticflexion of the bony claws, and in the fear-crazed expression of the leathery face. He couldnot get rid of the loathsome idea that those horrible, bulging eyes were about to pop suddenlyopen.

It was early in September, when the curious crowds had lessened and the hallof mummies was sometimes vacant, that the attempt to get at the mummy by cutting the glass ofits case was made. The culprit, a swarthy Polynesian, was spied in time by a guard, and wasoverpowered before any damage occurred. Upon investigation the fellow turned out to be an Hawaiiannotorious for his activity in certain underground religious cults, and having a considerablepolice record in connexion with abnormal and inhuman rites and sacrifices. Some of the papersfound in his room were highly puzzling and disturbing, including many sheets covered with hieroglyphsclosely resembling those on the scroll at the museum and in the Black Book of von Junzt;but regarding these things he could not be prevailed upon to speak.

Scarcely a week after this incident, another attempt to get at the mummy—thistime by tampering with the lock of his case—resulted in a second arrest. The offender,a Cingalese, had as long and unsavoury a record of loathsome cult activities as the Hawaiianhad possessed, and displayed a kindred unwillingness to talk to the police. What made this casedoubly and darkly interesting was that a guard had noticed this man several times before, andhad heard him addressing to the mummy a peculiar chant containing unmistakable repetitions ofthe word “T’yog”. As a result of this affair I doubled the guards in the hallof mummies, and ordered them never to leave the now notorious specimen out of sight, even fora moment.

As may well be imagined, the press made much of these two incidents, reviewingits talk of primal and fabulous Mu, and claiming boldly that the hideous mummy was none otherthan the daring heretic T’yog, petrified by something he had seen in the pre-human citadelhe had invaded, and preserved intact through 175,000 years of our planet’s turbulent history.That the strange devotees represented cults descended from Mu, and that they were worshippingthe mummy—or perhaps even seeking to awaken it to life by spells and incantations—wasemphasised and reiterated in the most sensational fashion.

Writers exploited the insistence of the old legends that the brain ofGhatanothoa’s petrified victims remained conscious and unaffected—a point which servedas a basis for the wildest and most improbable speculations. The mention of a “true scroll”also received due attention—it being the prevailing popular theory that T’yog’sstolen charm against Ghatanothoa was somewhere in existence, and that cult-members were tryingto bring it into contact with T’yog himself for some purpose of their own. One result ofthis exploitation was that a third wave of gaping visitors began flooding the museum and staringat the hellish mummy which served as a nucleus for the whole strange and disturbing affair.

It was among this wave of spectators—many of whom made repeated visits—thattalk of the mummy’s vaguely changing aspect first began to be widespread. I suppose—despitethe disturbing notion of the nervous guard some months before—that the museum’s personnelwas too well used to the constant sight of odd shapes to pay close attention to details; inany case, it was the excited whispers of visitors which at length aroused the guards to thesubtle mutation which was apparently in progress. Almost simultaneously the press got hold ofit—with blatant results which can well be imagined.

Naturally, I gave the matter my most careful observation, and by the middleof October decided that a definite disintegration of the mummy was under way. Through some chemicalor physical influence in the air, the half-stony, half-leathery fibres seemed to be graduallyrelaxing, causing distinct variations in the angles of the limbs and in certain details of thefear-twisted facial expression. After a half-century of perfect preservation this was a highlydisconcerting development, and I had the museum’s taxidermist, Dr. Moore, go carefullyover the gruesome object several times. He reported a general relaxation and softening, andgave the thing two or three astringent sprayings, but did not dare to attempt anything drasticlest there be a sudden crumbling and accelerated decay.

The effect of all this upon the gaping crowds was curious. Heretofore eachnew sensation sprung by the press had brought fresh waves of staring and whispering visitors,but now—though the papers blathered endlessly about the mummy’s changes—the publicseemed to have acquired a definite sense of fear which outranked even its morbid curiosity.People seemed to feel that a sinister aura hovered over the museum, and from a high peak theattendance fell to a level distinctly below normal. This lessened attendance gave added prominenceto the stream of freakish foreigners who continued to infest the place, and whose numbers seemedin no way diminished.

On November 18th a Peruvian of Indian blood suffered a strange hysterical orepileptic seizure in front of the mummy, afterward shrieking from his hospital cot, “Ittried to open its eyes!—T’yog tried to open his eyes and stare at me!” I wasby this time on the point of removing the object from exhibition, but permitted myself to beoverruled at a meeting of our very conservative directors. However, I could see that the museumwas beginning to acquire an unholy reputation in its austere and quiet neighbourhood. Afterthis incident I gave instructions that no one be allowed to pause before the monstrous Pacificrelic for more than a few minutes at a time.

It was on November 24th, after the museum’s five o’clock closing,that one of the guards noticed a minute opening of the mummy’s eyes. The phenomenon wasvery slight—nothing but a thin crescent of cornea being visible in either eye—butit was none the less of the highest interest. Dr. Moore, having been summoned hastily, was aboutto study the exposed bits of eyeball with a magnifier when his handling of the mummy causedthe leathery lids to fall tightly shut again. All gentle efforts to open them failed, and thetaxidermist did not dare to apply drastic measures. When he notified me of all this by telephoneI felt a sense of mounting dread hard to reconcile with the apparently simple event concerned.For a moment I could share the popular impression that some evil, amorphous blight from unplumbeddeeps of time and space hung murkily and menacingly over the museum.

Two nights later a sullen Filipino was trying to secrete himself in the museumat closing time. Arrested and taken to the station, he refused even to give his name, and wasdetained as a suspicious person. Meanwhile the strict surveillance of the mummy seemed to discouragethe odd hordes of foreigners from haunting it. At least, the number of exotic visitors distinctlyfell off after the enforcement of the “move along” order.

It was during the early morning hours of Thursday, December 1st, that a terribleclimax developed. At about one o’clock horrible screams of mortal fright and agony wereheard issuing from the museum, and a series of frantic telephone calls from neighbours broughtto the scene quickly and simultaneously a squad of police and several museum officials, includingmyself. Some of the policemen surrounded the building while others, with the officials, cautiouslyentered. In the main corridor we found the night watchman strangled to death—a bit of EastIndian hemp still knotted around his neck—and realised that despite all precautions somedarkly evil intruder or intruders had gained access to the place. Now, however, a tomb-likesilence enfolded everything and we almost feared to advance upstairs to the fateful wing wherewe knew the core of the trouble must lurk. We felt a bit more steadied after flooding the buildingwith light from the central switches in the corridor, and finally crept reluctantly up the curvingstaircase and through a lofty archway to the hall of mummies.

V.

It is from this point onward that reports of the hideous case have been censored—forwe have all agreed that no good can be accomplished by a public knowledge of those terrestrialconditions implied by the further developments. I have said that we flooded the whole buildingwith light before our ascent. Now beneath the beams that beat down on the glistening cases andtheir gruesome contents, we saw outspread a mute horror whose baffling details testified tohappenings utterly beyond our comprehension. There were two intruders—who we afterwardagreed must have hidden in the building before closing time—but they would never be executedfor the watchman’s murder. They had already paid the penalty.

One was a Burmese and the other a Fiji-Islander—both known to the policefor their share in frightful and repulsive cult activities. They were dead, and the more weexamined them the more utterly monstrous and unnamable we felt their manner of death to be.On both faces was a more wholly frantic and inhuman look of fright than even the oldest policemanhad ever seen before; yet in the state of the two bodies there were vast and significant differences.

The Burmese lay collapsed close to the nameless mummy’s case, from whicha square of glass had been neatly cut. In his right hand was a scroll of bluish membrane whichI at once saw was covered with greyish hieroglyphs—almost a duplicate of the scroll inthe strange cylinder in the library downstairs, though later study brought out subtle differences.There was no mark of violence on the body, and in view of the desperate, agonised expressionon the twisted face we could only conclude that the man died of sheer fright.

It was the closely adjacent Fijian, though, that gave us the profoundest shock.One of the policemen was the first to feel of him, and the cry of fright he emitted added anothershudder to that neighbourhood’s night of terror. We ought to have known from the lethalgreyness of the once-black, fear-twisted face, and of the bony hands—one of which stillclutched an electric torch—that something was hideously wrong; yet every one of us wasunprepared for what that officer’s hesitant touch disclosed. Even now I can think of itonly with a paroxysm of dread and repulsion. To be brief—the hapless invader, who lessthan an hour before had been a sturdy living Melanesian bent on unknown evils, was now a rigid,ash-grey figure of stony, leathery petrification, in every respect identical with the crouching,aeon-old blasphemy in the violated glass case.

Yet that was not the worst. Crowning all other horrors, and indeed seizingour shocked attention before we turned to the bodies on the floor, was the state of the frightfulmummy. No longer could its changes be called vague and subtle, for it had now made radical shiftsof posture. It had sagged and slumped with a curious loss of rigidity; its bony claws had sunkuntil they no longer even partly covered its leathery, fear-crazed face; and—God help us!—itshellish bulging eyes had popped wide open, and seemed to be staring directly at the two intruderswho had died of fright or worse.

That ghastly, dead-fish stare was hideously mesmerising, and it haunted usall the time we were examining the bodies of the invaders. Its effect on our nerves was damnablyqueer, for we somehow felt a curious rigidity creeping over us and hampering our simplest motions—arigidity which later vanished very oddly when we passed the hieroglyphed scroll around for inspection.Every now and then I felt my gaze drawn irresistibly toward those horrible bulging eyes in thecase, and when I returned to study them after viewing the bodies I thought I detected somethingvery singular about the glassy surface of the dark and marvellously well-preserved pupils. Themore I looked, the more fascinated I became; and at last I went down to the office—despitethat strange stiffness in my limbs—and brought up a strong multiple magnifying glass. Withthis I commenced a very close and careful survey of the fishy pupils, while the others crowdedexpectantly around.

I had always been rather sceptical of the theory that scenes and objects becomephotographed on the retina of the eye in cases of death or coma; yet no sooner did I look throughthe lens than I realised the presence of some sort of image other than the room’s reflectionin the glassy, bulging optics of this nameless spawn of the aeons. Certainly, there was a dimlyoutlined scene on the age-old retinal surface, and I could not doubt that it formed the lastthing on which those eyes had looked in life—countless millennia ago. It seemed to be steadilyfading, and I fumbled with the magnifier in order to shift another lens into place. Yet it musthave been accurate and clear-cut, even if infinitesimally small, when—in response to someevil spell or act connected with their visit—it had confronted those intruders who werefrightened to death. With the extra lens I could make out many details formerly invisible, andthe awed group around me hung on the flood of words with which I tried to tell what I saw.

For here, in the year 1932, a man in the city of Boston was looking on somethingwhich belonged to an unknown and utterly alien world—a world that vanished from existenceand normal memory aeons ago. There was a vast room—a chamber of Cyclopean masonry—andI seemed to be viewing it from one of its corners. On the walls were carvings so hideous thateven in this imperfect image their stark blasphemousness and bestiality sickened me. I couldnot believe that the carvers of these things were human, or that they had ever seen human beingswhen they shaped the frightful outlines which leered at the beholder. In the centre of the chamberwas a colossal trap-door of stone, pushed upward to permit the emergence of some object frombelow. The object should have been clearly visible—indeed, must have been when the eyesfirst opened before the fear-stricken intruders—though under my lenses it was merely amonstrous blur.

As it happened, I was studying the right eye only when I brought the extramagnification into play. A moment later I wished fervently that my search had ended there. Asit was, however, the zeal of discovery and revelation was upon me, and I shifted my powerfullenses to the mummy’s left eye in the hope of finding the image less faded on that retina.My hands, trembling with excitement and unnaturally stiff from some obscure influence, wereslow in bringing the magnifier into focus, but a moment later I realised that the image wasless faded than in the other eye. I saw in a morbid flash of half-distinctness the insufferablething which was welling up through the prodigious trap-door in that Cyclopean, immemoriallyarchaic crypt of a lost world—and fell fainting with an inarticulate shriek of which Iam not even ashamed.

By the time I revived there was no distinct image of anything in either eyeof the monstrous mummy. Sergeant Keefe of the police looked with my glass, for I could not bringmyself to face that abnormal entity again. And I thanked all the powers of the cosmos that Ihad not looked earlier than I did. It took all my resolution, and a great deal of solicitation,to make me relate what I had glimpsed in the hideous moment of revelation. Indeed, I could notspeak till we had all adjourned to the office below, out of sight of that daemoniac thing whichcould not be. For I had begun to harbour the most terrible and fantastic notions about the mummyand its glassy, bulging eyes—that it had a kind of hellish consciousness, seeing all thatoccurred before it and trying vainly to communicate some frightful message from the gulfs oftime. That meant madness—but at last I thought I might be better off if I told what Ihad half seen.

After all, it was not a long thing to tell. Oozing and surging up out of thatyawning trap-door in the Cyclopean crypt I had glimpsed such an unbelievable behemothic monstrositythat I could not doubt the power of its original to kill with its mere sight. Even now I cannotbegin to suggest it with any words at my command. I might call itgigantic—tentacled—proboscidian—octopus-eyed—semi-amorphous—plastic—partlysquamous and partly rugose—ugh! But nothing I could say could even adumbrate the loathsome,unholy, non-human, extra-galactic horror and hatefulness and unutterable evil of that forbiddenspawn of black chaos and illimitable night. As I write these words the associated mental imagecauses me to lean back faint and nauseated. As I told of the sight to the men around me in theoffice, I had to fight to preserve the consciousness I had regained.

Nor were my hearers much less moved. Not a man spoke above a whisper for afull quarter-hour, and there were awed, half-furtive references to the frightful lore in theBlack Book, to the recent newspaper tales of cult-stirrings, and to the sinister eventsin the museum. Ghatanothoa&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Even its smallest perfect image could petrify—T’yog—thefalse scroll—he never came back—the true scroll which could fully or partly undo thepetrification—did it survive?—the hellish cults—the phrases overheard—“Itis none other than he”—“He had looked upon its face”—“He knowsall, though he can neither see nor feel”—“He had brought the memory down throughthe aeons”—“The true scroll will release him”—“Nagob has the truescroll”—“He can tell where to find it.” Only the healing greyness of thedawn brought us back to sanity; a sanity which made of that glimpse of mine a closed topic—somethingnot to be explained or thought of again.

We gave out only partial reports to the press, and later on coöperatedwith the papers in making other suppressions. For example, when the autopsy shewed the brainand several other internal organs of the petrified Fijian to be fresh and unpetrified, thoughhermetically sealed by the petrification of the exterior flesh—an anomaly about which physiciansare still guardedly and bewilderedly debating—we did not wish a furore to be started. Weknew too well what the yellow journals, remembering what was said of the intact-brained andstill-conscious state of Ghatanothoa’s stony-leathery victims, would make of this detail.

As matters stood, they pointed out that the man who had held the hieroglyphedscroll—and who had evidently thrust it at the mummy through the opening in the case—wasnot petrified, while the man who had not held it was. When they demanded that we makecertain experiments—applying the scroll both to the stony-leathery body of the Fijian andto the mummy itself—we indignantly refused to abet such superstitious notions. Of course,the mummy was withdrawn from public view and transferred to the museum laboratory awaiting areally scientific examination before some suitable medical authority. Remembering past events,we kept it under a strict guard; but even so, an attempt was made to enter the museum at 2:25a.m. on December 5th. Prompt working of the burglar alarm frustrated the design, though unfortunatelythe criminal or criminals escaped.

That no hint of anything further ever reached the public, I am profoundly thankful.I wish devoutly that there were nothing more to tell. There will, of course, be leaks, and ifanything happens to me I do not know what my executors will do with this manuscript; but atleast the case will not be painfully fresh in the multitude’s memory when the revelationcomes. Besides, no one will believe the facts when they are finally told. That is the curiousthing about the multitude. When their yellow press makes hints, they are ready to swallow anything;but when a stupendous and abnormal revelation is actually made, they laugh it aside as a lie.For the sake of general sanity it is probably better so.

I have said that a scientific examination of the frightful mummy was planned.This took place on December 8th, exactly a week after the hideous culmination of events, andwas conducted by the eminent Dr. William Minot, in conjunction with Wentworth Moore, Sc.D.,taxidermist of the museum. Dr. Minot had witnessed the autopsy of the oddly petrified Fijianthe week before. There were also present Messrs. Lawrence Cabot and Dudley Saltonstall of themuseum’s trustees, Drs. Mason, Wells, and Carver of the museum staff, two representativesof the press, and myself. During the week the condition of the hideous specimen had not visiblychanged, though some relaxation of its fibres caused the position of the glassy, open eyes toshift slightly from time to time. All of the staff dreaded to look at the thing—for itssuggestion of quiet, conscious watching had become intolerable—and it was only with aneffort that I could bring myself to attend the examination.

Dr. Minot arrived shortly after 1:00 p.m., and within a few minutes began hissurvey of the mummy. Considerable disintegration took place under his hands, and in view ofthis—and of what we told him concerning the gradual relaxation of the specimen since thefirst of October—he decided that a thorough dissection ought to be made before the substancewas further impaired. The proper instruments being present in the laboratory equipment, he beganat once; exclaiming aloud at the odd, fibrous nature of the grey, mummified substance.

But his exclamation was still louder when he made the first deep incision,for out of that cut there slowly trickled a thick crimson stream whose nature—despite theinfinite ages dividing this hellish mummy’s lifetime from the present—was utterlyunmistakable. A few more deft strokes revealed various organs in astonishing degrees of non-petrifiedpreservation—all, indeed, being intact except where injuries to the petrified exteriorhad brought about malformation or destruction. The resemblance of this condition to that foundin the fright-killed Fiji-Islander was so strong that the eminent physician gasped in bewilderment.The perfection of those ghastly bulging eyes was uncanny, and their exact state with respectto petrification was very difficult to determine.

At 3:30 p.m. the brain-case was opened—and ten minutes later our stunnedgroup took an oath of secrecy which only such guarded documents as this manuscript will evermodify. Even the two reporters were glad to confirm the silence. For the opening had revealeda pulsing, living brain.
