High up, crowning the grassy summit of a swelling mound whose sides are wooded near the basewith the gnarled trees of the primeval forest, stands the old chateau of my ancestors. For centuriesits lofty battlements have frowned down upon the wild and rugged countryside about, servingas a home and stronghold for the proud house whose honoured line is older even than the moss-growncastle walls. These ancient turrets, stained by the storms of generations and crumbling underthe slow yet mighty pressure of time, formed in the ages of feudalism one of the most dreadedand formidable fortresses in all France. From its machicolated parapets and mounted battlementsBarons, Counts, and even Kings had been defied, yet never had its spacious halls resounded tothe footsteps of the invader.

But since those glorious years all is changed. A poverty but little above thelevel of dire want, together with a pride of name that forbids its alleviation by the pursuitsof commercial life, have prevented the scions of our line from maintaining their estates inpristine splendour; and the falling stones of the walls, the overgrown vegetation in the parks,the dry and dusty moat, the ill-paved courtyards, and toppling towers without, as well as thesagging floors, the worm-eaten wainscots, and the faded tapestries within, all tell a gloomytale of fallen grandeur. As the ages passed, first one, then another of the four great turretswere left to ruin, until at last but a single tower housed the sadly reduced descendants ofthe once mighty lords of the estate.

It was in one of the vast and gloomy chambers of this remaining tower thatI, Antoine, last of the unhappy and accursed Comtes de C——, first saw the lightof day, ninety long years ago. Within these walls, and amongst the dark and shadowy forests,the wild ravines and grottoes of the hillside below, were spent the first years of my troubledlife. My parents I never knew. My father had been killed at the age of thirty-two, a month beforeI was born, by the fall of a stone somehow dislodged from one of the deserted parapets of thecastle; and my mother having died at my birth, my care and education devolved solely upon oneremaining servitor, an old and trusted man of considerable intelligence, whose name I rememberas Pierre. I was an only child, and the lack of companionship which this fact entailed uponme was augmented by the strange care exercised by my aged guardian in excluding me from thesociety of the peasant children whose abodes were scattered here and there upon the plains thatsurround the base of the hill. At the time, Pierre said that this restriction was imposed uponme because my noble birth placed me above association with such plebeian company. Now I knowthat its real object was to keep from my ears the idle tales of the dread curse upon our line,that were nightly told and magnified by the simple tenantry as they conversed in hushed accentsin the glow of their cottage hearths.

Thus isolated, and thrown upon my own resources, I spent the hours of my childhoodin poring over the ancient tomes that filled the shadow-haunted library of the chateau, andin roaming without aim or purpose through the perpetual dusk of the spectral wood that clothesthe side of the hill near its foot. It was perhaps an effect of such surroundings that my mindearly acquired a shade of melancholy. Those studies and pursuits which partake of the dark andoccult in Nature most strongly claimed my attention.

Of my own race I was permitted to learn singularly little, yet what small knowledgeof it I was able to gain, seemed to depress me much. Perhaps it was at first only the manifestreluctance of my old preceptor to discuss with me my paternal ancestry that gave rise to theterror which I ever felt at the mention of my great house; yet as I grew out of childhood, Iwas able to piece together disconnected fragments of discourse, let slip from the unwillingtongue which had begun to falter in approaching senility, that had a sort of relation to a certaincircumstance which I had always deemed strange, but which now became dimly terrible. The circumstanceto which I allude is the early age at which all the Comtes of my line had met their end. WhilstI had hitherto considered this but a natural attribute of a family of short-lived men, I afterwardpondered long upon these premature deaths, and began to connect them with the wanderings ofthe old man, who often spoke of a curse which for centuries had prevented the lives of the holdersof my title from much exceeding the span of thirty-two years. Upon my twenty-first birthday,the aged Pierre gave to me a family document which he said had for many generations been handeddown from father to son, and continued by each possessor. Its contents were of the most startlingnature, and its perusal confirmed the gravest of my apprehensions. At this time, my belief inthe supernatural was firm and deep-seated, else I should have dismissed with scorn the incrediblenarrative unfolded before my eyes.

The paper carried me back to the days of the thirteenth century, when the oldcastle in which I sat had been a feared and impregnable fortress. It told of a certain ancientman who had once dwelt on our estates, a person of no small accomplishments, though little abovethe rank of peasant; by name, Michel, usually designated by the surname of Mauvais, the Evil,on account of his sinister reputation. He had studied beyond the custom of his kind, seekingsuch things as the Philosopher’s Stone, or the Elixir of Eternal Life, and was reputedwise in the terrible secrets of Black Magic and Alchemy. Michel Mauvais had one son, named Charles,a youth as proficient as himself in the hidden arts, and who had therefore been called Le Sorcier,or the Wizard. This pair, shunned by all honest folk, were suspected of the most hideous practices.Old Michel was said to have burnt his wife alive as a sacrifice to the Devil, and the unaccountabledisappearances of many small peasant children were laid at the dreaded door of these two. Yetthrough the dark natures of the father and the son ran one redeeming ray of humanity; the evilold man loved his offspring with fierce intensity, whilst the youth had for his parent a morethan filial affection.

One night the castle on the hill was thrown into the wildest confusion by thevanishment of young Godfrey, son to Henri the Comte. A searching party, headed by the franticfather, invaded the cottage of the sorcerers and there came upon old Michel Mauvais, busy overa huge and violently boiling cauldron. Without certain cause, in the ungoverned madness of furyand despair, the Comte laid hands on the aged wizard, and ere he released his murderous holdhis victim was no more. Meanwhile joyful servants were proclaiming the finding of young Godfreyin a distant and unused chamber of the great edifice, telling too late that poor Michel hadbeen killed in vain. As the Comte and his associates turned away from the lowly abode of thealchemists, the form of Charles Le Sorcier appeared through the trees. The excited chatter ofthe menials standing about told him what had occurred, yet he seemed at first unmoved at hisfather’s fate. Then, slowly advancing to meet the Comte, he pronounced in dull yet terribleaccents the curse that ever afterward haunted the house of C——.

“Mayne’er a noble of thy murd’rous line

Survive to reach a greater age thanthine!”

spake he, when, suddenly leaping backwards into the black wood, he drew from his tunic a phialof colourless liquid which he threw into the face of his father’s slayer as he disappearedbehind the inky curtain of the night. The Comte died without utterance, and was buried the nextday, but little more than two and thirty years from the hour of his birth. No trace of the assassincould be found, though relentless bands of peasants scoured the neighbouring woods and the meadow-landaround the hill.

Thus time and the want of a reminder dulled the memory of the curse in theminds of the late Comte’s family, so that when Godfrey, innocent cause of the whole tragedyand now bearing the title, was killed by an arrow whilst hunting, at the age of thirty-two,there were no thoughts save those of grief at his demise. But when, years afterward, the nextyoung Comte, Robert by name, was found dead in a nearby field from no apparent cause, the peasantstold in whispers that their seigneur had but lately passed his thirty-second birthday when surprisedby early death. Louis, son to Robert, was found drowned in the moat at the same fateful age,and thus down through the centuries ran the ominous chronicle; Henris, Roberts, Antoines, andArmands snatched from happy and virtuous lives when little below the age of their unfortunateancestor at his murder.

That I had left at most but eleven years of further existence was made certainto me by the words which I read. My life, previously held at small value, now became dearerto me each day, as I delved deeper and deeper into the mysteries of the hidden world of blackmagic. Isolated as I was, modern science had produced no impression upon me, and I labouredas in the Middle Ages, as wrapt as had been old Michel and young Charles themselves in the acquisitionof daemonological and alchemical learning. Yet read as I might, in no manner could I accountfor the strange curse upon my line. In unusually rational moments, I would even go so far asto seek a natural explanation, attributing the early deaths of my ancestors to the sinisterCharles Le Sorcier and his heirs; yet having found upon careful inquiry that there were no knowndescendants of the alchemist, I would fall back to occult studies, and once more endeavour tofind a spell that would release my house from its terrible burden. Upon one thing I was absolutelyresolved. I should never wed, for since no other branches of my family were in existence, Imight thus end the curse with myself.

As I drew near the age of thirty, old Pierre was called to the land beyond.Alone I buried him beneath the stones of the courtyard about which he had loved to wander inlife. Thus was I left to ponder on myself as the only human creature within the great fortress,and in my utter solitude my mind began to cease its vain protest against the impending doom,to become almost reconciled to the fate which so many of my ancestors had met. Much of my timewas now occupied in the exploration of the ruined and abandoned halls and towers of the oldchateau, which in youth fear had caused me to shun, and some of which, old Pierre had once toldme, had not been trodden by human foot for over four centuries. Strange and awesome were manyof the objects I encountered. Furniture, covered by the dust of ages and crumbling with therot of long dampness, met my eyes. Cobwebs in a profusion never before seen by me were spuneverywhere, and huge bats flapped their bony and uncanny wings on all sides of the otherwiseuntenanted gloom.

Of my exact age, even down to days and hours, I kept a most careful record,for each movement of the pendulum of the massive clock in the library told off so much moreof my doomed existence. At length I approached that time which I had so long viewed with apprehension.Since most of my ancestors had been seized some little while before they reached the exact ageof Comte Henri at his end, I was every moment on the watch for the coming of the unknown death.In what strange form the curse should overtake me, I knew not; but I was resolved, at least,that it should not find me a cowardly or a passive victim. With new vigour I applied myselfto my examination of the old chateau and its contents.

It was upon one of the longest of all my excursions of discovery in the desertedportion of the castle, less than a week before that fatal hour which I felt must mark the utmostlimit of my stay on earth, beyond which I could have not even the slightest hope of continuingto draw breath, that I came upon the culminating event of my whole life. I had spent the betterpart of the morning in climbing up and down half-ruined staircases in one of the most dilapidatedof the ancient turrets. As the afternoon progressed, I sought the lower levels, descending intowhat appeared to be either a mediaeval place of confinement, or a more recently excavated storehousefor gunpowder. As I slowly traversed the nitre-encrusted passageway at the foot of the laststaircase, the paving became very damp, and soon I saw by the light of my flickering torch thata blank, water-stained wall impeded my journey. Turning to retrace my steps, my eye fell upona small trap-door with a ring, which lay directly beneath my feet. Pausing, I succeeded withdifficulty in raising it, whereupon there was revealed a black aperture, exhaling noxious fumeswhich caused my torch to sputter, and disclosing in the unsteady glare the top of a flight ofstone steps. As soon as the torch, which I lowered into the repellent depths, burned freelyand steadily, I commenced my descent. The steps were many, and led to a narrow stone-flaggedpassage which I knew must be far underground. The passage proved of great length, and terminatedin a massive oaken door, dripping with the moisture of the place, and stoutly resisting allmy attempts to open it. Ceasing after a time my efforts in this direction, I had proceeded backsome distance toward the steps, when there suddenly fell to my experience one of the most profoundand maddening shocks capable of reception by the human mind. Without warning, I heard theheavy door behind me creak slowly open upon its rusted hinges. My immediate sensations areincapable of analysis. To be confronted in a place as thoroughly deserted as I had deemed theold castle with evidence of the presence of man or spirit, produced in my brain a horror ofthe most acute description. When at last I turned and faced the seat of the sound, my eyes musthave started from their orbits at the sight that they beheld. There in the ancient Gothic doorwaystood a human figure. It was that of a man clad in a skull-cap and long mediaeval tunic of darkcolour. His long hair and flowing beard were of a terrible and intense black hue, and of incredibleprofusion. His forehead, high beyond the usual dimensions; his cheeks, deep-sunken and heavilylined with wrinkles; and his hands, long, claw-like, and gnarled, were of such a deathly, marble-likewhiteness as I have never elsewhere seen in man. His figure, lean to the proportions of a skeleton,was strangely bent and almost lost within the voluminous folds of his peculiar garment. Butstrangest of all were his eyes; twin caves of abysmal blackness, profound in expression of understanding,yet inhuman in degree of wickedness. These were now fixed upon me, piercing my soul with theirhatred, and rooting me to the spot whereon I stood. At last the figure spoke in a rumbling voicethat chilled me through with its dull hollowness and latent malevolence. The language in whichthe discourse was clothed was that debased form of Latin in use amongst the more learned menof the Middle Ages, and made familiar to me by my prolonged researches into the works of theold alchemists and daemonologists. The apparition spoke of the curse which had hovered overmy house, told me of my coming end, dwelt on the wrong perpetrated by my ancestor against oldMichel Mauvais, and gloated over the revenge of Charles Le Sorcier. He told how the young Charleshad escaped into the night, returning in after years to kill Godfrey the heir with an arrowjust as he approached the age which had been his father’s at his assassination; how hehad secretly returned to the estate and established himself, unknown, in the even then desertedsubterranean chamber whose doorway now framed the hideous narrator; how he had seized Robert,son of Godfrey, in a field, forced poison down his throat, and left him to die at the age ofthirty-two, thus maintaining the foul provisions of his vengeful curse. At this point I wasleft to imagine the solution of the greatest mystery of all, how the curse had been fulfilledsince that time when Charles Le Sorcier must in the course of Nature have died, for the mandigressed into an account of the deep alchemical studies of the two wizards, father and son,speaking most particularly of the researches of Charles Le Sorcier concerning the elixir whichshould grant to him who partook of it eternal life and youth.

His enthusiasm had seemed for the moment to remove from his terrible eyes thehatred that had at first so haunted them, but suddenly the fiendish glare returned, and witha shocking sound like the hissing of a serpent, the stranger raised a glass phial with the evidentintent of ending my life as had Charles Le Sorcier, six hundred years before, ended that ofmy ancestor. Prompted by some preserving instinct of self-defence, I broke through the spellthat had hitherto held me immovable, and flung my now dying torch at the creature who menacedmy existence. I heard the phial break harmlessly against the stones of the passage as the tunicof the strange man caught fire and lit the horrid scene with a ghastly radiance. The shriekof fright and impotent malice emitted by the would-be assassin proved too much for my alreadyshaken nerves, and I fell prone upon the slimy floor in a total faint.

When at last my senses returned, all was frightfully dark, and my mind rememberingwhat had occurred, shrank from the idea of beholding more; yet curiosity overmastered all. Who,I asked myself, was this man of evil, and how came he within the castle walls? Why should heseek to avenge the death of poor Michel Mauvais, and how had the curse been carried on throughall the long centuries since the time of Charles Le Sorcier? The dread of years was lifted frommy shoulders, for I knew that he whom I had felled was the source of all my danger from thecurse; and now that I was free, I burned with the desire to learn more of the sinister thingwhich had haunted my line for centuries, and made of my own youth one long-continued nightmare.Determined upon further exploration, I felt in my pockets for flint and steel, and lit the unusedtorch which I had with me. First of all, the new light revealed the distorted and blackenedform of the mysterious stranger. The hideous eyes were now closed. Disliking the sight, I turnedaway and entered the chamber beyond the Gothic door. Here I found what seemed much like an alchemist’slaboratory. In one corner was an immense pile of a shining yellow metal that sparkled gorgeouslyin the light of the torch. It may have been gold, but I did not pause to examine it, for I wasstrangely affected by that which I had undergone. At the farther end of the apartment was anopening leading out into one of the many wild ravines of the dark hillside forest. Filled withwonder, yet now realising how the man had obtained access to the chateau, I proceeded to return.I had intended to pass by the remains of the stranger with averted face, but as I approachedthe body, I seemed to hear emanating from it a faint sound, as though life were not yet whollyextinct. Aghast, I turned to examine the charred and shrivelled figure on the floor. Then allat once the horrible eyes, blacker even than the seared face in which they were set, openedwide with an expression which I was unable to interpret. The cracked lips tried to frame wordswhich I could not well understand. Once I caught the name of Charles Le Sorcier, and again Ifancied that the words “years” and “curse” issued from the twisted mouth.Still I was at a loss to gather the purport of his disconnected speech. At my evident ignoranceof his meaning, the pitchy eyes once more flashed malevolently at me, until, helpless as I sawmy opponent to be, I trembled as I watched him.

Suddenly the wretch, animated with his last burst of strength, raised his hideoushead from the damp and sunken pavement. Then, as I remained, paralysed with fear, he found hisvoice and in his dying breath screamed forth those words which have ever afterward haunted mydays and my nights. “Fool,” he shrieked, “can you not guess my secret? Haveyou no brain whereby you may recognise the will which has through six long centuries fulfilledthe dreadful curse upon your house? Have I not told you of the great elixir of eternal life?Know you not how the secret of Alchemy was solved? I tell you, it is I! I! I! that have livedfor six hundred years to maintain my revenge, FOR I AM CHARLES LE SORCIER!”
