Thursday

[November 3, 1927]Dear Melmoth:–

.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;So you are busy delving into the shady past of thatinsufferable young Asiatic Varius Avitus Bassianus?  Ugh!  There are few persons I loathe more thanthat cursed little Syrian rat!

I have myself been carried back to Roman times by my recent perusal of JamesRhoades’ Æneid, a translation never before read by me, and more faithful to P.Maro than any other versified version I have ever seen—including that of my late uncle Dr.Clark, which did not attain publication.  This Virgilian diversion, together with the spectralthoughts incident to All Hallows’ Eve with its Witch-Sabbaths on the hills, produced in melast Monday night a Roman dream of such supernal clearness and vividness, and such titanicadumbrations of hidden horror, that I verily believe I shall some day employ it in fiction.  Romandreams were no uncommon features of my youth—I used to follow the Divine Julius all overGallia as a Tribunus Militum o’nights—but I had so long ceased to experience them, thatthe present one impressed me with extraordinary force.

It was a flaming sunset or late afternoon in the tiny provincial town of Pompelo,at the foot of the Pyrenees in Hispania Citerior. The year must have been in the late republic, forthe province was still ruled by a senatorial proconsul instead of a prætorian legate ofAugustus, and the day was the first before the Kalends of November. The hills rose scarlet and goldto the north of the little town, and the westering sun shone ruddily and mystically on the crudenew stone and plaster buildings of the dusty forum and the wooden walls of the circus some distanceto the east. Groups of citizens—broad-browed Roman colonists and coarse-haired Romanisednatives, together with obvious hybrids of the two strains, alike clad in cheap woollentogas—and sprinklings of helmeted legionaries and coarse-mantled, black-bearded tribesmen ofthe circumambient Vascones—all thronged the few paved streets and forum; moved by some vagueand ill-defined uneasiness.

I myself had just alighted from a litter, which the Illyrian bearers seemed tohave brought in some haste from Calagurris, across the Iberus to the southward. It appeared that Iwas a provincial quæstor named L. Cælius Rufus, and that I had been summoned by theproconsul, P. Scribonius Libo, who had come from Tarraco some days before. The soldiers were thefifth cohort of the XIIth legion, under the military tribune Sex. Asellius; and the legatus of thewhole region, Cn. Balbutius, had also come from Calagurris, where the permanent station was.

The cause of the conference was a horror that brooded on the hills. All thetownsfolk were frightened, and had begged the presence of a cohort from Calagurris. It was theTerrible Season of the autumn, and the wild people in the mountains were preparing for thefrightful ceremonies which only rumour told of in the towns. They were the very old folk who dwelthigher up in the hills and spoke a choppy language which the Vascones could not understand. Oneseldom saw them; but a few times a year they sent down little yellow, squint-eyed messengers (wholooked like Scythians) to trade with the merchants by means of gestures, and every spring andautumn they held the infamous rites on the peaks, their howlings and altar-fires throwing terrorinto the villages. Always the same—the night before the Kalends of Maius and the night beforethe Kalends of November. Townsfolk would disappear just before these nights, and would never beheard of again. And there were whispers that the native shepherds and farmers were not ill-disposedtoward the very old folk—that more than one thatched hut was vacant before midnight on the twohideous Sabbaths.

This year the horror was very great, for the people knew that the wrath of thevery old folk was upon Pompelo. Three months previously five of the little squint-eyed traders hadcome down from the hills, and in a market brawl three of them had been killed. The remaining twohad gone back wordlessly to their mountains—and this autumn not a single villager haddisappeared. There was menace in this immunity. It was not like the very old folk to spare theirvictims at the Sabbath. It was too good to be normal, and the villagers were afraid.

For many nights there had been a hollow drumming on the hills, and at last theædile Tib. Annæus Stilpo (half native in blood) had sent to Balbutius at Calagurris fora cohort to stamp out the Sabbath on the terrible night. Balbutius had carelessly refused, on theground that the villagers’ fears were empty, and that the loathsome rites of hill folk were of noconcern to the Roman People unless our own citizens were menaced. I, however, who seemed to be aclose friend of Balbutius, had disagreed with him; averring that I had studied deeply in the blackforbidden lore, and that I believed the very old folk capable of visiting almost any nameless doomupon the town, which after all was a Roman settlement and contained a great number of our citizens.The complaining ædile’s own mother Helvia was a pure Roman, the daughter of M. Helvius Cinna,who had come over with Scipio’s army. Accordingly I had sent a slave—a nimble little Greekcalled Antipater—to the proconsul with letters, and Scribonius had heeded my plea and orderedBalbutius to send his fifth cohort, under Asellius, to Pompelo; entering the hills at dusk on theeve of November’s Kalends and stamping out whatever nameless orgies he might find—bringingsuch prisoners as he might take to Tarraco for the next proprætor’s court. Balbutius,however, had protested, so that more correspondence had ensued. I had written so much to theproconsul that he had become gravely interested, and had resolved to make a personal inquiry intothe horror.

He had at length proceeded to Pompelo with his lictors and attendants; therehearing enough rumours to be greatly impressed and disturbed, and standing firmly by his order forthe Sabbath’s extirpation. Desirous of conferring with one who had studied the subject, he orderedme to accompany Asellius’ cohort—and Balbutius had also come along to press his adverseadvice, for he honestly believed that drastic military action would stir up a dangerous sentimentof unrest amongst the Vascones both tribal and settled.

So here we all were in the mystic sunset of the autumn hills—old ScriboniusLibo in his toga prætexta, the golden light glancing on his shiny bald head and wrinkled hawkface, Balbutius with his gleaming helmet and breastplate, blue-shaven lips compressed inconscientiously dogged opposition, young Asellius with his polished greaves and superior sneer, andthe curious throng of townsfolk, legionaries, tribesmen, peasants, lictors, slaves, and attendants.I myself seemed to wear a common toga, and to have no especially distinguishing characteristic. Andeverywhere horror brooded. The town and country folk scarcely dared speak aloud, and the men ofLibo’s entourage, who had been there nearly a week, seemed to have caught something of the namelessdread. Old Scribonius himself looked very grave, and the sharp voices of us later comers seemed tohold something of curious inappropriateness, as in a place of death or the temple of some mysticgod.

We entered the prætorium and held grave converse. Balbutius pressed hisobjections, and was sustained by Asellius, who appeared to hold all the natives in extreme contemptwhile at the same time deeming it inadvisable to excite them. Both soldiers maintained that wecould better afford to antagonise the minority of colonists and civilised natives by inaction, thanto antagonise a probable majority of tribesmen and cottagers by stamping out the dread rites.

I, on the other hand, renewed my demand for action, and offered to accompany thecohort on any expedition it might undertake. I pointed out that the barbarous Vascones were at bestturbulent and uncertain, so that skirmishes with them were inevitable sooner or later whichevercourse we might take; that they had not in the past proved dangerous adversaries to our legions,and that it would ill become the representatives of the Roman People to suffer barbarians tointerfere with a course which the justice and prestige of the Republic demanded. That, on the otherhand, the successful administration of a province depended primarily upon the safety and good-willof the civilised element in whose hands the local machinery of commerce and prosperity reposed, andin whose veins a large mixture of our own Italian blood coursed. These, though in numbers theymight form a minority, were the stable element whose constancy might be relied on, and whosecooperation would most firmly bind the province to the Imperium of the Senate and the Roman People.It was at once a duty and an advantage to afford them the protection due to Roman citizens; even(and here I shot a sarcastic look at Balbutius and Asellius) at the expense of a little trouble andactivity, and of a slight interruption of the draught-playing and cock-fighting at the camp inCalagurris. That the danger to the town and inhabitants of Pompelo was a real one, I could not frommy studies doubt. I had read many scrolls out of Syria and Ægyptus, and the cryptic towns ofEtruria, and had talked at length with the bloodthirsty priest of Diana Aricina in his temple inthe woods bordering Lacus Nemorensis. There were shocking dooms that might be called out of thehills on the Sabbaths; dooms which ought not to exist within the territories of the Roman People;and to permit orgies of the kind known to prevail at Sabbaths would be but little in consonancewith the customs of those whose forefathers, A. Postumius being consul, had executed so many Romancitizens for the practice of the Bacchanalia—a matter kept ever in memory by the SenatusConsultum de Bacchanalibus, graven upon bronze and set open to every eye. Checked in time, beforethe progress of the rites might evoke anything with which the iron of a Roman pilum might not beable to deal, the Sabbath would not be too much for the powers of a single cohort. Onlyparticipants need be apprehended, and the sparing of a great number of mere spectators wouldconsiderably lessen the resentment which any of the sympathising country folk might feel. In short,both principle and policy demanded stern action; and I could not doubt but that Publius Scribonius,bearing in mind the dignity and obligations of the Roman People, would adhere to his plan ofdespatching the cohort, me accompanying, despite such objections as Balbutius andAsellius—speaking indeed more like provincials than Romans—might see fit to offer andmultiply.

The slanting sun was now very low, and the whole hushed town seemed draped in anunreal and malign glamour. Then P. Scribonius the proconsul signified his approval of my words, andstationed me with the cohort in the provisional capacity of a centurio primipilus; Balbutius andAsellius assenting, the former with better grace than the latter. As twilight fell on the wildautumnal slopes, a measured, hideous beating of strange drums floated down from afar in terriblerhythm. Some few of the legionarii shewed timidity, but sharp commands brought them into line, andthe whole cohort was soon drawn up on the open plain east of the circus. Libo himself, as well asBalbutius, insisted on accompanying the cohort; but great difficulty was suffered in getting anative guide to point out the paths up the mountain. Finally a young man named Vercellius, the sonof pure Roman parents, agreed to take us at least past the foothills. We began to march in the newdusk, with the thin silver sickle of a young moon trembling over the woods on our left. That whichdisquieted us most was the fact that the Sabbath was to be held at all. Reports of thecoming cohort must have reached the hills, and even the lack of a final decision could not make therumour less alarming—yet there were the sinister drums as of yore, as if the celebrants hadsome peculiar reason to be indifferent whether or not the forces of the Roman People marchedagainst them. The sound grew louder as we entered a rising gap in the hills, steep wooded banksenclosing us narrowly on either side, and displaying curiously fantastic tree-trunks in the lightof our bobbing torches. All were afoot save Libo, Balbutius, Asellius, two or three of thecenturiones, and myself, and at length the way became so steep and narrow that those who had horseswere forced to leave them; a squad of ten men being left to guard them, though robber bands werenot likely to be abroad on such a night of terror. Once in a while it seemed as though we detecteda skulking form in the woods nearby, and after a half-hour’s climb the steepness and narrowness ofthe way made the advance of so great a body of men—over 300, all told—exceedinglycumbrous and difficult. Then with utter and horrifying suddenness we heard a frightful sound frombelow. It was from the tethered horses—they had screamed, not neighed, butscreamed... and there was no light down there, nor the sound of any human thing, to shew whythey had done so. At the same moment bonfires blazed out on all the peaks ahead, so that terrorseemed to lurk equally well before and behind us. Looking for the youth Vercellius, our guide, wefound only a crumpled heap weltering in a pool of blood. In his hand was a short sword snatchedfrom the belt of D. Vibulanus, a subcenturio, and on his face was such a look of terror that thestoutest veterans turned pale at the sight. He had killed himself when the horses screamed... he,who had been born and lived all his life in that region, and knew what men whispered about thehills. All the torches now began to dim, and the cries of frightened legionaries mingled with theunceasing screams of the tethered horses. The air grew perceptibly colder, more suddenly so than isusual at November’s brink, and seemed stirred by terrible undulations which I could not helpconnecting with the beating of huge wings. The whole cohort now remained at a standstill, and asthe torches faded I watched what I thought were fantastic shadows outlined in the sky by thespectral luminosity of the Via Lactea as it flowed through Perseus, Cassiopeia, Cepheus, andCygnus. Then suddenly all the stars were blotted from the sky—even bright Deneb and Vegaahead, and the lone Altair and Fomalhaut behind us. And as the torches died out altogether, thereremained above the stricken and shrieking cohort only the noxious and horrible altar-flames on thetowering peaks; hellish and red, and now silhouetting the mad, leaping, and colossal forms of suchnameless beasts as had never a Phrygian priest or Campanian grandam whispered of in the wildest offurtive tales. And above the nighted screaming of men and horses that dæmonic drumming roseto louder pitch, whilst an ice-cold wind of shocking sentience and deliberateness swept down fromthose forbidden heights and coiled about each man separately, till all the cohort was strugglingand screaming in the dark, as if acting out the fate of Laocoön and his sons. Only oldScribonius Libo seemed resigned. He uttered words amidst the screaming, and they echo still in myears. “Malitia vetus—malitia vetus est&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. venit&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.tandem venit&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”

And then I waked. It was the most vivid dream in years, drawing upon wells of thesubconscious long untouched and forgotten. Of the fate of that cohort no record exists, but thetown at least was saved—for encyclopædias tell of the survival of Pompelo to this day,under the modern Spanish name of Pompelona.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

Yrs for GothickSupremacy–

C · IVLIVS · VERVS ·MAXIMINVS.
