When Randolph Carter was thirty he lost the key of the gate of dreams. Prior to that time hehad made up for the prosiness of life by nightly excursions to strange and ancient cities beyondspace, and lovely, unbelievable garden lands across ethereal seas; but as middle age hardenedupon him he felt these liberties slipping away little by little, until at last he was cut offaltogether. No more could his galleys sail up the river Oukranos past the gilded spires of Thran,or his elephant caravans tramp through perfumed jungles in Kled, where forgotten palaces withveined ivory columns sleep lovely and unbroken under the moon.

He had read much of things as they are, and talked with too many people. Well-meaningphilosophers had taught him to look into the logical relations of things, and analyse the processeswhich shaped his thoughts and fancies. Wonder had gone away, and he had forgotten that all lifeis only a set of pictures in the brain, among which there is no difference betwixt those bornof real things and those born of inward dreamings, and no cause to value the one above the other.Custom had dinned into his ears a superstitious reverence for that which tangibly and physicallyexists, and had made him secretly ashamed to dwell in visions. Wise men told him his simplefancies were inane and childish, and he believed it because he could see that they might easilybe so. What he failed to recall was that the deeds of reality are just as inane and childish,and even more absurd because their actors persist in fancying them full of meaning and purposeas the blind cosmos grinds aimlessly on from nothing to something and from something back tonothing again, neither heeding nor knowing the wishes or existence of the minds that flickerfor a second now and then in the darkness.

They had chained him down to things that are, and had then explained the workingsof those things till mystery had gone out of the world. When he complained, and longed to escapeinto twilight realms where magic moulded all the little vivid fragments and prized associationsof his mind into vistas of breathless expectancy and unquenchable delight, they turned him insteadtoward the new-found prodigies of science, bidding him find wonder in the atom’s vortexand mystery in the sky’s dimensions. And when he had failed to find these boons in thingswhose laws are known and measurable, they told him he lacked imagination, and was immature becausehe preferred dream-illusions to the illusions of our physical creation.

So Carter had tried to do as others did, and pretended that the common eventsand emotions of earthy minds were more important than the fantasies of rare and delicate souls.He did not dissent when they told him that the animal pain of a stuck pig or dyspeptic ploughmanin real life is a greater thing than the peerless beauty of Narath with its hundred carven gatesand domes of chalcedony, which he dimly remembered from his dreams; and under their guidancehe cultivated a painstaking sense of pity and tragedy.

Once in a while, though, he could not help seeing how shallow, fickle, andmeaningless all human aspirations are, and how emptily our real impulses contrast with thosepompous ideals we profess to hold. Then he would have recourse to the polite laughter they hadtaught him to use against the extravagance and artificiality of dreams; for he saw that thedaily life of our world is every inch as extravagant and artificial, and far less worthy ofrespect because of its poverty in beauty and its silly reluctance to admit its own lack of reasonand purpose. In this way he became a kind of humorist, for he did not see that even humour isempty in a mindless universe devoid of any true standard of consistency or inconsistency.

In the first days of his bondage he had turned to the gentle churchly faithendeared to him by the naive trust of his fathers, for thence stretched mystic avenues whichseemed to promise escape from life. Only on closer view did he mark the starved fancy and beauty,the stale and prosy triteness, and the owlish gravity and grotesque claims of solid truth whichreigned boresomely and overwhelmingly among most of its professors; or feel to the full theawkwardness with which it sought to keep alive as literal fact the outgrown fears and guessesof a primal race confronting the unknown. It wearied Carter to see how solemnly people triedto make earthly reality out of old myths which every step of their boasted science confuted,and this misplaced seriousness killed the attachment he might have kept for the ancient creedshad they been content to offer the sonorous rites and emotional outlets in their true guiseof ethereal fantasy.

But when he came to study those who had thrown off the old myths, he foundthem even more ugly than those who had not. They did not know that beauty lies in harmony, andthat loveliness of life has no standard amidst an aimless cosmos save only its harmony withthe dreams and the feelings which have gone before and blindly moulded our little spheres outof the rest of chaos. They did not see that good and evil and beauty and ugliness are only ornamentalfruits of perspective, whose sole value lies in their linkage to what chance made our fathersthink and feel, and whose finer details are different for every race and culture. Instead, theyeither denied these things altogether or transferred them to the crude, vague instincts whichthey shared with the beasts and peasants; so that their lives were dragged malodorously outin pain, ugliness, and disproportion, yet filled with a ludicrous pride at having escaped fromsomething no more unsound than that which still held them. They had traded the false gods offear and blind piety for those of licence and anarchy.

Carter did not taste deeply of these modern freedoms; for their cheapness andsqualor sickened a spirit loving beauty alone, while his reason rebelled at the flimsy logicwith which their champions tried to gild brute impulse with a sacredness stripped from the idolsthey had discarded. He saw that most of them, in common with their cast-off priestcraft, couldnot escape from the delusion that life has a meaning apart from that which men dream into it;and could not lay aside the crude notion of ethics and obligations beyond those of beauty, evenwhen all Nature shrieked of its unconsciousness and impersonal unmorality in the light of theirscientific discoveries. Warped and bigoted with preconceived illusions of justice, freedom,and consistency, they cast off the old lore and the old ways with the old beliefs; nor everstopped to think that that lore and those ways were the sole makers of their present thoughtsand judgments, and the sole guides and standards in a meaningless universe without fixed aimsor stable points of reference. Having lost these artificial settings, their lives grew voidof direction and dramatic interest; till at length they strove to drown their ennui in bustleand pretended usefulness, noise and excitement, barbaric display and animal sensation. Whenthese things palled, disappointed, or grew nauseous through revulsion, they cultivated ironyand bitterness, and found fault with the social order. Never could they realise that their brutefoundations were as shifting and contradictory as the gods of their elders, and that the satisfactionof one moment is the bane of the next. Calm, lasting beauty comes only in dream, and this solacethe world had thrown away when in its worship of the real it threw away the secrets of childhoodand innocence.

Amidst this chaos of hollowness and unrest Carter tried to live as befitteda man of keen thought and good heritage. With his dreams fading under the ridicule of the agehe could not believe in anything, but the love of harmony kept him close to the ways of hisrace and station. He walked impassive through the cities of men, and sighed because no vistaseemed fully real; because every flash of yellow sunlight on tall roofs and every glimpse ofbalustraded plazas in the first lamps of evening served only to remind him of dreams he hadonce known, and to make him homesick for ethereal lands he no longer knew how to find. Travelwas only a mockery; and even the Great War stirred him but little, though he served from thefirst in the Foreign Legion of France. For a while he sought friends, but soon grew weary ofthe crudeness of their emotions, and the sameness and earthiness of their visions. He felt vaguelyglad that all his relatives were distant and out of touch with him, for they could not haveunderstood his mental life. That is, none but his grandfather and great-uncle Christopher could,and they were long dead.

Then he began once more the writing of books, which he had left off when dreamsfirst failed him. But here, too, was there no satisfaction or fulfilment; for the touch of earthwas upon his mind, and he could not think of lovely things as he had done of yore. Ironic humourdragged down all the twilight minarets he reared, and the earthy fear of improbability blastedall the delicate and amazing flowers in his faery gardens. The convention of assumed pity spiltmawkishness on his characters, while the myth of an important reality and significant humanevents and emotions debased all his high fantasy into thin-veiled allegory and cheap socialsatire. His new novels were successful as his old ones had never been; and because he knew howempty they must be to please an empty herd, he burned them and ceased his writing. They werevery graceful novels, in which he urbanely laughed at the dreams he lightly sketched; but hesaw that their sophistication had sapped all their life away.

It was after this that he cultivated deliberate illusion, and dabbled in thenotions of the bizarre and the eccentric as an antidote for the commonplace. Most of these,however, soon shewed their poverty and barrenness; and he saw that the popular doctrines ofoccultism are as dry and inflexible as those of science, yet without even the slender palliativeof truth to redeem them. Gross stupidity, falsehood, and muddled thinking are not dream; andform no escape from life to a mind trained above their level. So Carter bought stranger booksand sought out deeper and more terrible men of fantastic erudition; delving into arcana of consciousnessthat few have trod, and learning things about the secret pits of life, legend, and immemorialantiquity which disturbed him ever afterward. He decided to live on a rarer plane, and furnishedhis Boston home to suit his changing moods; one room for each, hung in appropriate colours,furnished with befitting books and objects, and provided with sources of the proper sensationsof light, heat, sound, taste, and odour.

Once he heard of a man in the South who was shunned and feared for the blasphemousthings he read in prehistoric books and clay tablets smuggled from India and Arabia. Him hevisited, living with him and sharing his studies for seven years, till horror overtook themone midnight in an unknown and archaic graveyard, and only one emerged where two had entered.Then he went back to Arkham, the terrible witch-haunted old town of his forefathers in New England,and had experiences in the dark, amidst the hoary willows and tottering gambrel roofs, whichmade him seal forever certain pages in the diary of a wild-minded ancestor. But these horrorstook him only to the edge of reality, and were not of the true dream country he had known inyouth; so that at fifty he despaired of any rest or contentment in a world grown too busy forbeauty and too shrewd for dream.

Having perceived at last the hollowness and futility of real things, Carterspent his days in retirement, and in wistful disjointed memories of his dream-filled youth.He thought it rather silly that he bothered to keep on living at all, and got from a South Americanacquaintance a very curious liquid to take him to oblivion without suffering. Inertia and forceof habit, however, caused him to defer action; and he lingered indecisively among thoughts ofold times, taking down the strange hangings from his walls and refitting the house as it wasin his early boyhood—purple panes, Victorian furniture, and all.

With the passage of time he became almost glad he had lingered, for his relicsof youth and his cleavage from the world made life and sophistication seem very distant andunreal; so much so that a touch of magic and expectancy stole back into his nightly slumbers.For years those slumbers had known only such twisted reflections of every-day things as thecommonest slumbers know, but now there returned a flicker of something stranger and wilder;something of vaguely awesome immanence which took the form of tensely clear pictures from hischildhood days, and made him think of little inconsequential things he had long forgotten. Hewould often awake calling for his mother and grandfather, both in their graves a quarter ofa century.

Then one night his grandfather reminded him of a key. The grey old scholar,as vivid as in life, spoke long and earnestly of their ancient line, and of the strange visionsof the delicate and sensitive men who composed it. He spoke of the flame-eyed Crusader who learntwild secrets of the Saracens that held him captive; and of the first Sir Randolph Carter whostudied magic when Elizabeth was queen. He spoke, too, of that Edmund Carter who had just escapedhanging in the Salem witchcraft, and who had placed in an antique box a great silver key handeddown from his ancestors. Before Carter awaked, the gentle visitant had told him where to findthat box; that carved oak box of archaic wonder whose grotesque lid no hand had raised for twocenturies.

In the dust and shadows of the great attic he found it, remote and forgottenat the back of a drawer in a tall chest. It was about a foot square, and its Gothic carvingswere so fearful that he did not marvel no person since Edmund Carter had dared to open it. Itgave forth no noise when shaken, but was mystic with the scent of unremembered spices. Thatit held a key was indeed only a dim legend, and Randolph Carter’s father had never knownsuch a box existed. It was bound in rusty iron, and no means was provided for working the formidablelock. Carter vaguely understood that he would find within it some key to the lost gate of dreams,but of where and how to use it his grandfather had told him nothing.

An old servant forced the carven lid, shaking as he did so at the hideous facesleering from the blackened wood, and at some unplaced familiarity. Inside, wrapped in a discolouredparchment, was a huge key of tarnished silver covered with cryptical arabesques; but of anylegible explanation there was none. The parchment was voluminous, and held only the strangehieroglyphs of an unknown tongue written with an antique reed. Carter recognised the charactersas those he had seen on a certain papyrus scroll belonging to that terrible scholar of the Southwho had vanished one midnight in a nameless cemetery. The man had always shivered when he readthis scroll, and Carter shivered now.

But he cleaned the key, and kept it by him nightly in its aromatic box of ancientoak. His dreams were meanwhile increasing in vividness, and though shewing him none of the strangecities and incredible gardens of the old days, were assuming a definite cast whose purpose couldnot be mistaken. They were calling him back along the years, and with the mingled wills of allhis fathers were pulling him toward some hidden and ancestral source. Then he knew he must gointo the past and merge himself with old things, and day after day he thought of the hills tothe north where haunted Arkham and the rushing Miskatonic and the lonely rustic homestead ofhis people lay.

In the brooding fire of autumn Carter took the old remembered way past gracefullines of rolling hill and stone-walled meadow, distant vale and hanging woodland, curving roadand nestling farmstead, and the crystal windings of the Miskatonic, crossed here and there byrustic bridges of wood or stone. At one bend he saw the group of giant elms among which an ancestorhad oddly vanished a century and a half before, and shuddered as the wind blew meaningly throughthem. Then there was the crumbling farmhouse of old Goody Fowler the witch, with its littleevil windows and great roof sloping nearly to the ground on the north side. He speeded up hiscar as he passed it, and did not slacken till he had mounted the hill where his mother and herfathers before her were born, and where the old white house still looked proudly across theroad at the breathlessly lovely panorama of rocky slope and verdant valley, with the distantspires of Kingsport on the horizon, and hints of the archaic, dream-laden sea in the farthestbackground.

Then came the steeper slope that held the old Carter place he had not seenin over forty years. Afternoon was far gone when he reached the foot, and at the bend half wayup he paused to scan the outspread countryside golden and glorified in the slanting floods ofmagic poured out by a western sun. All the strangeness and expectancy of his recent dreams seemedpresent in this hushed and unearthly landscape, and he thought of the unknown solitudes of otherplanets as his eyes traced out the velvet and deserted lawns shining undulant between theirtumbled walls, the clumps of faery forest setting off far lines of purple hills beyond hills,and the spectral wooded valley dipping down in shadow to dank hollows where trickling waterscrooned and gurgled among swollen and distorted roots.

Something made him feel that motors did not belong in the realm he was seeking,so he left his car at the edge of the forest, and putting the great key in his coat pocket walkedon up the hill. Woods now engulfed him utterly, though he knew the house was on a high knollthat cleared the trees except to the north. He wondered how it would look, for it had been leftvacant and untended through his neglect since the death of his strange great-uncle Christopherthirty years before. In his boyhood he had revelled through long visits there, and had foundweird marvels in the woods beyond the orchard.

Shadows thickened around him, for the night was near. Once a gap in the treesopened up to the right, so that he saw off across leagues of twilight meadow and spied the oldCongregational steeple on Central Hill in Kingsport; pink with the last flush of day, the panesof the little round windows blazing with reflected fire. Then, when he was in deep shadow again,he recalled with a start that the glimpse must have come from childish memory alone, since theold white church had long been torn down to make room for the Congregational Hospital. He hadread of it with interest, for the paper had told about some strange burrows or passages foundin the rocky hill beneath.

Through his puzzlement a voice piped, and he started again at its familiarityafter long years. Old Benijah Corey had been his Uncle Christopher’s hired man, and wasaged even in those far-off times of his boyhood visits. Now he must be well over a hundred,but that piping voice could come from no one else. He could distinguish no words, yet the tonewas haunting and unmistakable. To think that “Old Benijy” should still be alive!

“Mister Randy! Mister Randy! Whar be ye? D’ye want to skeer yerAunt Marthy plumb to death? Hain’t she tuld ye to keep nigh the place in the arternoonan’ git back afur dark? Randy! Ran&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. dee!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He’sthe beatin’est boy fer runnin’ off in the woods I ever see; haff the time a-settin’moonin’ raound that snake-den in the upper timber-lot!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hey, yew, Ran&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.dee!”

Randolph Carter stopped in the pitch darkness and rubbed his hand across hiseyes. Something was queer. He had been somewhere he ought not to be; had strayed very far awayto places where he had not belonged, and was now inexcusably late. He had not noticed the timeon the Kingsport steeple, though he could easily have made it out with his pocket telescope;but he knew his lateness was something very strange and unprecedented. He was not sure he hadhis little telescope with him, and put his hand in his blouse pocket to see. No, it was notthere, but there was the big silver key he had found in a box somewhere. Uncle Chris had toldhim something odd once about an old unopened box with a key in it, but Aunt Martha had stoppedthe story abruptly, saying it was no kind of thing to tell a child whose head was already toofull of queer fancies. He tried to recall just where he had found the key, but something seemedvery confused. He guessed it was in the attic at home in Boston, and dimly remembered bribingParks with half his week’s allowance to help him open the box and keep quiet about it;but when he remembered this, the face of Parks came up very strangely, as if the wrinkles oflong years had fallen upon the brisk little Cockney.

“Ran&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. dee! Ran&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. dee! Hi! Hi!Randy!”

A swaying lantern came around the black bend, and old Benijah pounced on thesilent and bewildered form of the pilgrim.

“Durn ye, boy, so thar ye be! Ain’t ye got a tongue in yer head,that ye can’t answer a body? I ben callin’ this haff hour, an’ ye must a heerdme long ago! Dun’t ye know yer Aunt Marthy’s all a-fidget over yer bein’off arter dark? Wait till I tell yer Uncle Chris when he gits hum! Ye’d orta know thesehere woods ain’t no fitten place to be traipsin’ this hour! They’s thingsabroad what dun’t do nobody no good, as my gran’sir’ knowed afur me. Come,Mister Randy, or Hannah wun’t keep supper no longer!”

So Randolph Carter was marched up the road where wondering stars glimmeredthrough high autumn boughs. And dogs barked as the yellow light of small-paned windows shoneout at the farther turn, and the Pleiades twinkled across the open knoll where a great gambrelroof stood black against the dim west. Aunt Martha was in the doorway, and did not scold toohard when Benijah shoved the truant in. She knew Uncle Chris well enough to expect such thingsof the Carter blood. Randolph did not shew his key, but ate his supper in silence and protestedonly when bedtime came. He sometimes dreamed better when awake, and he wanted to use that key.

In the morning Randolph was up early, and would have run off to the upper timber-lotif Uncle Chris had not caught him and forced him into his chair by the breakfast table. He lookedimpatiently around the low-pitched room with the rag carpet and exposed beams and corner-posts,and smiled only when the orchard boughs scratched at the leaded panes of the rear window. Thetrees and the hills were close to him, and formed the gates of that timeless realm which washis true country.

Then, when he was free, he felt in his blouse pocket for the key; and beingreassured, skipped off across the orchard to the rise beyond, where the wooded hill climbedagain to heights above even the treeless knoll. The floor of the forest was mossy and mysterious,and great lichened rocks rose vaguely here and there in the dim light like Druid monoliths amongthe swollen and twisted trunks of a sacred grove. Once in his ascent Randolph crossed a rushingstream whose falls a little way off sang runic incantations to the lurking fauns and aegipansand dryads.

Then he came to the strange cave in the forest slope, the dreaded “snake-den”which country folk shunned, and away from which Benijah had warned him again and again. It wasdeep; far deeper than anyone but Randolph suspected, for the boy had found a fissure in thefarthermost black corner that led to a loftier grotto beyond—a haunting sepulchral placewhose granite walls held a curious illusion of conscious artifice. On this occasion he crawledin as usual, lighting his way with matches filched from the sitting-room match-safe, and edgingthrough the final crevice with an eagerness hard to explain even to himself. He could not tellwhy he approached the farther wall so confidently, or why he instinctively drew forth the greatsilver key as he did so. But on he went, and when he danced back to the house that night heoffered no excuses for his lateness, nor heeded in the least the reproofs he gained for ignoringthe noontide dinner-horn altogether.

Now it is agreed by all the distant relatives of Randolph Carter that something occurred toheighten his imagination in his tenth year. His cousin, Ernest B. Aspinwall, Esq., of Chicago,is fully ten years his senior; and distinctly recalls a change in the boy after the autumn of1883. Randolph had looked on scenes of fantasy that few others can ever have beheld, and strangerstill were some of the qualities which he shewed in relation to very mundane things. He seemed,in fine, to have picked up an odd gift of prophecy; and reacted unusually to things which, thoughat the time without meaning, were later found to justify the singular impressions. In subsequentdecades as new inventions, new names, and new events appeared one by one in the book of history,people would now and then recall wonderingly how Carter had years before let fall some carelessword of undoubted connexion with what was then far in the future. He did not himself understandthese words, or know why certain things made him feel certain emotions; but fancied that someunremembered dream must be responsible. It was as early as 1897 that he turned pale when sometraveller mentioned the French town of Belloy-en-Santerre, and friends remembered it when hewas almost mortally wounded there in 1916, while serving with the Foreign Legion in the GreatWar.

Carter’s relatives talk much of these things because he has lately disappeared.His little old servant Parks, who for years bore patiently with his vagaries, last saw him onthe morning he drove off alone in his car with a key he had recently found. Parks had helpedhim get the key from the old box containing it, and had felt strangely affected by the grotesquecarvings on the box, and by some other odd quality he could not name. When Carter left, he hadsaid he was going to visit his old ancestral country around Arkham.

Half way up Elm Mountain, on the way to the ruins of the old Carter place,they found his motor set carefully by the roadside; and in it was a box of fragrant wood withcarvings that frightened the countrymen who stumbled on it. The box held only a queer parchmentwhose characters no linguist or palaeographer has been able to decipher or identify. Rain hadlong effaced any possible footprints, though Boston investigators had something to say aboutevidences of disturbances among the fallen timbers of the Carter place. It was, they averred,as though someone had groped about the ruins at no distant period. A common white handkerchieffound among forest rocks on the hillside beyond cannot be identified as belonging to the missingman.

There is talk of apportioning Randolph Carter’s estate among his heirs,but I shall stand firmly against this course because I do not believe he is dead. There aretwists of time and space, of vision and reality, which only a dreamer can divine; and from whatI know of Carter I think he has merely found a way to traverse these mazes. Whether or not hewill ever come back, I cannot say. He wanted the lands of dream he had lost, and yearned forthe days of his childhood. Then he found a key, and I somehow believe he was able to use itto strange advantage.

I shall ask him when I see him, for I expect to meet him shortly in a certaindream-city we both used to haunt. It is rumoured in Ulthar, beyond the river Skai, that a newking reigns on the opal throne in Ilek-Vad, that fabulous town of turrets atop the hollow cliffsof glass overlooking the twilight sea wherein the bearded and finny Gnorri build their singularlabyrinths, and I believe I know how to interpret this rumour. Certainly, I look forward impatientlyto the sight of that great silver key, for in its cryptical arabesques there may stand symbolisedall the aims and mysteries of a blindly impersonal cosmos.
