It was on a certain Thursday morning in December that the whole thing began with that unaccountablemotion I thought I saw in my antique Copenhagen mirror. Something, it seemed to me, stirred—somethingreflected in the glass, though I was alone in my quarters. I paused and looked intently, then,deciding that the effect must be a pure illusion, resumed the interrupted brushing of my hair.

I had discovered the old mirror, covered with dust and cobwebs, in an outbuildingof an abandoned estate-house in Santa Cruz’s sparsely settled Northside territory, andhad brought it to the United States from the Virgin Islands. The venerable glass was dim frommore than two hundred years’ exposure to a tropical climate, and the graceful ornamentationalong the top of the gilt frame had been badly smashed. I had had the detached pieces set backinto the frame before placing it in storage with my other belongings.

Now, several years later, I was staying half as a guest and half as a tutorat the private school of my old friend Browne on a windy Connecticut hillside—occupyingan unused wing in one of the dormitories, where I had two rooms and a hallway to myself. Theold mirror, stowed securely in mattresses, was the first of my possessions to be unpacked onmy arrival; and I had set it up majestically in the living-room, on top of an old rosewood consolewhich had belonged to my great-grandmother.

The door of my bedroom was just opposite that of the living-room, with a hallwaybetween; and I had noticed that by looking into my chiffonier glass I could see the larger mirrorthrough the two doorways—which was exactly like glancing down an endless, though diminishing,corridor. On this Thursday morning I thought I saw a curious suggestion of motion down thatnormally empty corridor—but, as I have said, soon dismissed the notion.

When I reached the dining-room I found everyone complaining of the cold, andlearned that the school’s heating-plant was temporarily out of order. Being especiallysensitive to low temperatures, I was myself an acute sufferer; and at once decided not to braveany freezing schoolroom that day. Accordingly I invited my class to come over to my living-roomfor an informal session around my grate-fire—a suggestion which the boys received enthusiastically.

After the session one of the boys, Robert Grandison, asked if he might remain;since he had no appointment for the second morning period. I told him to stay, and welcome.He sat down to study in front of the fireplace in a comfortable chair.

It was not long, however, before Robert moved to another chair somewhat fartheraway from the freshly replenished blaze, this change bringing him directly opposite the oldmirror. From my own chair in another part of the room I noticed how fixedly he began to lookat the dim, cloudy glass, and, wondering what so greatly interested him, was reminded of myown experience earlier that morning. As time passed he continued to gaze, a slight frown knittinghis brows.

At last I quietly asked him what had attracted his attention. Slowly, and stillwearing the puzzled frown, he looked over and replied rather cautiously:

“It’s the corrugations in the glass—or whatever they are, Mr.Canevin. I was noticing how they all seem to run from a certain point. Look—I’ll showyou what I mean.”

The boy jumped up, went over to the mirror, and placed his finger on a pointnear its lower left-hand corner.

“It’s right here, sir,” he explained, turning to look towardme and keeping his finger on the chosen spot.

His muscular action in turning may have pressed his finger against the glass.Suddenly he withdrew his hand as though with some slight effort, and with a faintly muttered“Ouch.” Then he looked at the glass in obvious mystification.

“What happened?” I asked, rising and approaching.

“Why—it—” He seemed embarrassed. “It—I—felt—well,as though it were pulling my finger into it. Seems—er—perfectly foolish, sir, but—well—itwas a most peculiar sensation.” Robert had an unusual vocabulary for his fifteen years.

I came over and had him show me the exact spot he meant.

“You’ll think I’m rather a fool, sir,” he said shamefacedly,“but—well, from right here I can’t be absolutely sure. From the chair it seemedto be clear enough.”

Now thoroughly interested, I sat down in the chair Robert had occupied andlooked at the spot he selected on the mirror. Instantly the thing “jumped out at me.”Unmistakably, from that particular angle, all the many whorls in the ancient glass appearedto converge like a large number of spread strings held in one hand and radiating out in streams.

Getting up and crossing to the mirror, I could no longer see the curious spot.Only from certain angles, apparently, was it visible. Directly viewed, that portion of the mirrordid not even give back a normal reflection—for I could not see my face in it. ManifestlyI had a minor puzzle on my hands.

Presently the school gong sounded, and the fascinated Robert Grandison departedhurriedly, leaving me alone with my odd little problem in optics. I raised several window-shades,crossed the hallway, and sought for the spot in the chiffonier mirror’s reflection. Findingit readily, I looked very intently and thought I again detected something of the “motion.”I craned my neck, and at last, at a certain angle of vision, the thing again “jumped outat me.”

The vague “motion” was now positive and definite—an appearanceof torsional movement, or of whirling; much like a minute yet intense whirlwind or waterspout,or a huddle of autumn leaves dancing circularly in an eddy of wind along a level lawn. It was,like the earth’s, a double motion—around and around, and at the same time inward,as if the whorls poured themselves endlessly toward some point inside the glass. Fascinated,yet realizing that the thing must be an illusion, I grasped an impression of quite distinctsuction, and thought of Robert’s embarrassed explanation: “I felt as thoughit were pulling my finger into it.”

A kind of slight chill ran suddenly up and down my backbone. There was somethinghere distinctly worth looking into. And as the idea of investigation came to me, I recalledthe rather wistful expression of Robert Grandison when the gong called him to class. I rememberedhow he had looked back over his shoulder as he walked obediently out into the hallway, and resolvedthat he should be included in whatever analysis I might make of this little mystery.

Exciting events connected with that same Robert, however, were soon to chaseall thoughts of the mirror from my consciousness for a time. I was away all that afternoon,and did not return to the school until the five-fifteen “Call-Over”—a generalassembly at which the boys’ attendance was compulsory. Dropping in at this function withthe idea of picking Robert up for a session with the mirror, I was astonished and pained tofind him absent—a very unusual and unaccountable thing in his case. That evening Brownetold me that the boy had actually disappeared, a search in his room, in the gymnasium, and inall other accustomed places being unavailing, though all his belongings—including his outdoorclothing—were in their proper places.

He had not been encountered on the ice or with any of the hiking groups thatafternoon, and telephone calls to all the school-catering merchants of the neighborhood werein vain. There was, in short, no record of his having been seen since the end of the lessonperiods at two-fifteen; when he had turned up the stairs toward his room in Dormitory NumberThree.

When the disappearance was fully realized, the resulting sensation was tremendousthroughout the school. Browne, as headmaster, had to bear the brunt of it; and such an unprecedentedoccurrence in his well-regulated, highly organized institution left him quite bewildered. Itwas learned that Robert had not run away to his home in western Pennsylvania, nor did any ofthe searching-parties of boys and masters find any trace of him in the snowy countryside aroundthe school. So far as could be seen, he had simply vanished.

Robert’s parents arrived on the afternoon of the second day after hisdisappearance. They took their trouble quietly, though, of course, they were staggered by thisunexpected disaster. Browne looked ten years older for it, but there was absolutely nothingthat could be done. By the fourth day the case had settled down in the opinion of the schoolas an insoluble mystery. Mr. and Mrs. Grandison went reluctantly back to their home, and onthe following morning the ten days’ Christmas vacation began.

Boys and masters departed in anything but the usual holiday spirit; and Browneand his wife were left, along with the servants, as my only fellow-occupants of the big place.Without the masters and boys it seemed a very hollow shell indeed.

That afternoon I sat in front of my grate-fire thinking about Robert’sdisappearance and evolving all sorts of fantastic theories to account for it. By evening I hadacquired a bad headache, and ate a light supper accordingly. Then, after a brisk walk aroundthe massed buildings, I returned to my living-room and took up the burden of thought once more.

A little after ten o’clock I awakened in my armchair, stiff and chilled,from a doze during which I had let the fire go out. I was physically uncomfortable, yet mentallyaroused by a peculiar sensation of expectancy and possible hope. Of course it had to do withthe problem that was harassing me. For I had started from that inadvertent nap with a curious,persistent idea—the odd idea that a tenuous, hardly recognizable Robert Grandison had beentrying desperately to communicate with me. I finally went to bed with one conviction unreasoninglystrong in my mind. Somehow I was sure that young Robert Grandison was still alive.

That I should be receptive of such a notion will not seem strange to thosewho know my long residence in the West Indies and my close contact with unexplained happeningsthere. It will not seem strange, either, that I fell asleep with an urgent desire to establishsome sort of mental communication with the missing boy. Even the most prosaic scientists affirm,with Freud, Jung, and Adler, that the subconscious mind is most open to external impressionsin sleep; though such impressions are seldom carried over intact into the waking state.

Going a step further and granting the existence of telepathic forces, it followsthat such forces must act most strongly on a sleeper; so that if I were ever to get a definitemessage from Robert, it would be during a period of profoundest slumber. Of course, I mightlose the message in waking; but my aptitude for retaining such things has been sharpened bytypes of mental discipline picked up in various obscure corners of the globe.

I must have dropped asleep instantaneously, and from the vividness of my dreamsand the absence of wakeful intervals I judge that my sleep was a very deep one. It was six-forty-fivewhen I awakened, and there still lingered with me certain impressions which I knew were carriedover from the world of somnolent cerebration. Filling my mind was the vision of Robert Grandisonstrangely transformed to a boy of a dull greenish dark-blue color; Robert desperately endeavoringto communicate with me by means of speech, yet finding some almost insuperable difficulty inso doing. A wall of curious spatial separation seemed to stand between him and me—a mysterious,invisible wall which completely baffled us both.

I had seen Robert as though at some distance, yet queerly enough he seemedat the same time to be just beside me. He was both larger and smaller than in real life, hisapparent size varying directly, instead of inversely, with the distance as headvanced and retreated in the course of conversation. That is, he grew larger instead of smallerto my eye when he stepped away or backwards, and vice versa; as if the laws of perspective inhis case had been wholly reversed. His aspect was misty and uncertain—as if he lacked sharpor permanent outlines; and the anomalies of his coloring and clothing baffled me utterly atfirst.

At some point in my dream Robert’s vocal efforts had finally crystallizedinto audible speech—albeit speech of an abnormal thickness and dullness. I could not fora time understand anything he said, and even in the dream racked my brain for a clue to wherehe was, what he wanted to tell, and why his utterance was so clumsy and unintelligible. Thenlittle by little I began to distinguish words and phrases, the very first of which sufficedto throw my dreaming self into the wildest excitement and to establish a certain mental connectionwhich had previously refused to take conscious form because of the utter incredibility of whatit implied.

I do not know how long I listened to those halting words amidst my deep slumber,but hours must have passed while the strangely remote speaker struggled on with his tale. Therewas revealed to me such a circumstance as I cannot hope to make others believe without the strongestcorroborative evidence, yet which I was quite ready to accept as truth—both in the dreamand after waking—because of my former contacts with uncanny things. The boy was obviouslywatching my face—mobile in receptive sleep—as he choked along; for about the time Ibegan to comprehend him, his own expression brightened and gave signs of gratitude and hope.

Any attempt to hint at Robert’s message, as it lingered in my ears aftera sudden awakening in the cold, brings this narrative to a point where I must choose my wordswith the greatest care. Everything involved is so difficult to record that one tends to flounderhelplessly. I have said that the revelation established in my mind a certain connection whichreason had not allowed me to formulate consciously before. This connection, I need no longerhesitate to hint, had to do with the old Copenhagen mirror whose suggestions of motion had soimpressed me on the morning of the disappearance, and whose whorl-like contours and apparentillusions of suction had later exerted such a disquieting fascination on both Robert and me.

Resolutely, though my outer consciousness had previously rejected what my intuitionwould have liked to imply, it could reject that stupendous conception no longer. What was fantasyin the tale of “Alice” now came to me as a grave and immediate reality. That looking-glasshad indeed possessed a malign, abnormal suction; and the struggling speaker in my dream madeclear the extent to which it violated all the known precedents of human experience and all theage-old laws of our three sane dimensions. It was more than a mirror—it was a gate; a trap;a link with spatial recesses not meant for the denizens of our visible universe, and realizableonly in terms of the most intricate non-Euclidean mathematics. And in some outrageous fashionRobert Grandison had passed out of our ken into the glass and was there immured, waiting forrelease.

It is significant that upon awakening I harbored no genuine doubt of the realityof the revelation. That I had actually held conversation with a trans-dimensional Robert, ratherthan evoked the whole episode from my broodings about his disappearance and about the old illusionsof the mirror, was as certain to my utmost instincts as any of the instinctive certainties commonlyrecognized as valid.

The tale thus unfolded to me was of the most incredibly bizarre character.As had been clear on the morning of his disappearance, Robert was intensely fascinated by theancient mirror. All through the hours of school, he had it in mind to come back to my living-roomand examine it further. When he did arrive, after the close of the school day, it was somewhatlater than two-twenty, and I was absent in town. Finding me out and knowing that I would notmind, he had come into my living-room and gone straight to the mirror; standing before it andstudying the place where, as we had noted, the whorls appeared to converge.

Then, quite suddenly, there had come to him an overpowering urge to place hishand upon this whorl-center. Almost reluctantly, against his better judgment, he had done so;and upon making the contact had felt at once the strange, almost painful suction which had perplexedhim that morning. Immediately thereafter—quite without warning, but with a wrench whichseemed to twist and tear every bone and muscle in his body and to bulge and press and cut atevery nerve—he had been abruptly drawn through and found himself inside.

Once through, the excruciatingly painful stress upon his entire system wassuddenly released. He felt, he said, as though he had just been born—a feeling that madeitself evident every time he tried to do anything; walk, stoop, turn his head, or utter speech.Everything about his body seemed a misfit.

These sensations wore off after a long while, Robert’s body becoming anorganized whole rather than a number of protesting parts. Of all the forms of expression, speechremained the most difficult; doubtless because it is complicated, bringing into play a numberof different organs, muscles, and tendons. Robert’s feet, on the other hand, were the firstmembers to adjust themselves to the new conditions within the glass.

During the morning hours I rehearsed the whole reason-defying problem; correlatingeverything I had seen and heard, dismissing the natural scepticism of a man of sense, and schemingto devise possible plans for Robert’s release from his incredible prison. As I did so anumber of originally perplexing points became clear—or at least, clearer—to me.

There was, for example, the matter of Robert’s coloring. His face andhands, as I have indicated, were a kind of dull greenish dark-blue; and I may add that his familiarblue Norfolk jacket had turned to a pale lemon-yellow while his trousers remained a neutralgray as before. Reflecting on this after waking, I found the circumstance closely allied tothe reversal of perspective which made Robert seem to grow larger when receding and smallerwhen approaching. Here, too, was a physical reversal—for every detail of his coloringin the unknown dimension was the exact reverse or complement of the corresponding color detailin normal life. In physics the typical complementary colors are blue and yellow, and red andgreen. These pairs are opposites, and when mixed yield gray. Robert’s natural color wasa pinkish-buff, the opposite of which is the greenish-blue I saw. His blue coat had become yellow,while the gray trousers remained gray. This latter point baffled me until I remembered thatgray is itself a mixture of opposites. There is no opposite for gray—or rather, it is itsown opposite.

Another clarified point was that pertaining to Robert’s curiously dulledand thickened speech—as well as to the general awkwardness and sense of misfit bodily partsof which he complained. This, at the outset, was a puzzle indeed; though after long thoughtthe clue occurred to me. Here again was the same reversal which affected perspectiveand coloration. Anyone in the fourth dimension must necessarily be reversed in just this way—handsand feet, as well as colors and perspectives, being changed about. It would be the same withall the other dual organs, such as nostrils, ears, and eyes. Thus Robert had been talking witha reversed tongue, teeth, vocal cords, and kindred speech-apparatus; so that his difficultiesin utterance were little to be wondered at.

As the morning wore on, my sense of the stark reality and maddening urgencyof the dream-disclosed situation increased rather than decreased. More and more I felt thatsomething must be done, yet realized that I could not seek advice or aid. Such a story as mine—aconviction based upon mere dreaming—could not conceivably bring me anything but ridiculeor suspicions as to my mental state. And what, indeed, could I do, aided or unaided, with aslittle working data as my nocturnal impressions had provided? I must, I finally recognized,have more information before I could even think of a possible plan for releasing Robert. Thiscould come only through the receptive conditions of sleep, and it heartened me to reflect thataccording to every probability my telepathic contact would be resumed the moment I fell intodeep slumber again.

I accomplished sleeping that afternoon, after a midday dinner at which, throughrigid self-control, I succeeded in concealing from Browne and his wife the tumultuous thoughtsthat crashed through my mind. Hardly had my eyes closed when a dim telepathic image began toappear; and I soon realized to my infinite excitement that it was identical with what I hadseen before. If anything, it was more distinct; and when it began to speak I seemed able tograsp a greater proportion of the words.

During this sleep I found most of the morning’s deductions confirmed,though the interview was mysteriously cut off long prior to my awakening. Robert had seemedapprehensive just before communication ceased, but had already told me that in his strange fourth-dimensionalprison colors and spatial relationships were indeed reversed—black being white, distanceincreasing apparent size, and so on.

He had also intimated that, notwithstanding his possession of full physicalform and sensations, most human vital properties seemed curiously suspended. Nutriment, forexample, was quite unnecessary—a phenomenon really more singular than the omnipresent reversalof objects and attributes, since the latter was a reasonable and mathematically indicated stateof things. Another significant piece of information was that the only exit from the glass tothe world was the entrance-way, and that this was permanently barred and impenetrably sealed,so far as egress was concerned.

That night I had another visitation from Robert; nor did such impressions,received at odd intervals while I slept receptively minded, cease during the entire period ofhis incarceration. His efforts to communicate were desperate and often pitiful; for at timesthe telepathic bond would weaken, while at other times fatigue, excitement, or fear of interruptionwould hamper and thicken his speech.

I may as well narrate as a continuous whole all that Robert told me throughoutthe whole series of transient mental contacts—perhaps supplementing it at certain pointswith facts directly related after his release. The telepathic information was fragmentary andoften nearly inarticulate, but I studied it over and over during the waking intervals of threeintense days; classifying and cogitating with feverish diligence, since it was all that I hadto go upon if the boy were to be brought back into our world.

The fourth-dimensional region in which Robert found himself was not, as inscientific romance, an unknown and infinite realm of strange sights and fantastic denizens;but was rather a projection of certain limited parts of our own terrestrial sphere within analien and normally inaccessible aspect or direction of space. It was a curiously fragmentary,intangible, and heterogeneous world—a series of apparently dissociated scenes merging indistinctlyone into the other; their constituent details having an obviously different status from thatof an object drawn into the ancient mirror as Robert had been drawn. These scenes were likedream-vistas or magic-lantern images—elusive visual impressions of which the boy was notreally a part, but which formed a sort of panoramic background or ethereal environment againstwhich or amidst which he moved.

He could not touch any of the parts of these scenes—walls, trees, furniture,and the like—but whether this was because they were truly non-material, or because theyalways receded at his approach, he was singularly unable to determine. Everything seemed fluid,mutable, and unreal. When he walked, it appeared to be on whatever lower surface the visiblescene might have—floor, path, greensward, or such; but upon analysis he always found thatthe contact was an illusion. There was never any difference in the resisting force met by hisfeet—and by his hands when he would stoop experimentally—no matter what changes ofapparent surface might be involved. He could not describe this foundation or limiting planeon which he walked as anything more definite than a virtually abstract pressure balancing hisgravity. Of definite tactile distinctiveness it had none, and supplementing it there seemedto be a kind of restricted levitational force which accomplished transfers of altitude. He couldnever actually climb stairs, yet would gradually walk up from a lower level to a higher.

Passage from one definite scene to another involved a sort of gliding througha region of shadow or blurred focus where the details of each scene mingled curiously. All thevistas were distinguished by the absence of transient objects, and the indefinite or ambiguousappearance of such semi-transient objects as furniture or details of vegetation. The lightingof every scene was diffuse and perplexing, and of course the scheme of reversed colors—brightred grass, yellow sky with confused black and gray cloud-forms, white tree-trunks, and greenbrick walls—gave to everything an air of unbelievable grotesquerie. There was an alterationof day and night, which turned out to be a reversal of the normal hours of light and darknessat whatever point on the earth the mirror might be hanging.

This seemingly irrelevant diversity of the scenes puzzled Robert until he realizedthat they comprised merely such places as had been reflected for long continuous periods inthe ancient glass. This also explained the odd absence of transient objects, the generally arbitraryboundaries of vision, and the fact that all exteriors were framed by the outlines of doorwaysor windows. The glass, it appeared, had power to store up these intangible scenes through longexposure; though it could never absorb anything corporeally, as Robert had been absorbed, exceptby a very different and particular process.

But—to me at least—the most incredible aspect of the mad phenomenonwas the monstrous subversion of our known laws of space involved in the relation of variousillusory scenes to the actual terrestrial regions represented. I have spoken of the glass asstoring up the images of these regions, but this is really an inexact definition. In truth,each of the mirror scenes formed a true and quasi-permanent fourth-dimensional projection ofthe corresponding mundane region; so that whenever Robert moved to a certain part of a certainscene, as he moved into the image of my room when sending his telepathic messages, he wasactually in that place itself, on earth—though under spatial conditions which cut offall sensory communication, in either direction, between him and the present tri-dimensionalaspect of the place.

Theoretically speaking, a prisoner in the glass could in a few moments go anywhereon our planet—into any place, that is, which had ever been reflected in the mirror’ssurface. This probably applied even to places where the mirror had not hung long enough to producea clear illusory scene; the terrestrial region being then represented by a zone of more or lessformless shadow. Outside the definite scenes was a seemingly limitless waste of neutral grayshadow about which Robert could never be certain, and into which he never dared stray far lesthe become hopelessly lost to the real and mirror worlds alike.

Among the earliest particulars which Robert gave, was the fact that he wasnot alone in his confinement. Various others, all in antique garb, were in there with him—acorpulent middle-aged gentleman with tied queue and velvet knee-breeches who spoke English fluentlythough with a marked Scandinavian accent; a rather beautiful small girl with very blonde hairwhich appeared a glossy dark blue; two apparently mute Negroes whose features contrasted grotesquelywith the pallor of their reversed-colored skins; three young men; one young woman; a very smallchild, almost an infant; and a lean, elderly Dane of extremely distinctive aspect and a kindof half-malign intellectuality of countenance.

This last-named individual—Axel Holm, who wore the satin small-clothes,flared-skirted coat, and voluminous full-bottomed periwig of an age more than two centuriesin the past—was notable among the little band as being the one responsible for the presenceof them all. He it was who, skilled equally in the arts of magic and glass working, had longago fashioned this strange dimensional prison in which himself, his slaves, and those whom hechose to invite or allure thither were immured unchangingly for as long as the mirror mightendure.

Holm was born early in the seventeenth century, and had followed with tremendouscompetence and success the trade of a glass-blower and molder in Copenhagen. His glass, especiallyin the form of large drawing-room mirrors, was always at a premium. But the same bold mind whichhad made him the first glazier of Europe also served to carry his interests and ambitions farbeyond the sphere of mere material craftsmanship. He had studied the world around him, and chafedat the limitations of human knowledge and capability. Eventually he sought for dark ways toovercome those limitations, and gained more success than is good for any mortal.

He had aspired to enjoy something like eternity, the mirror being his provisionto secure this end. Serious study of the fourth dimension was far from beginning with Einsteinin our own era; and Holm, more than erudite in all the methods of his day, knew that a bodilyentrance into that hidden phase of space would prevent him from dying in the ordinary physicalsense. Research showed him that the principle of reflection undoubtedly forms the chief gateto all dimensions beyond our familiar three; and chance placed in his hands a small and veryancient glass whose cryptic properties he believed he could turn to advantage. Once “inside”this mirror according to the method he had envisaged, he felt that “life” in the senseof form and consciousness would go on virtually forever, provided the mirror could be preservedindefinitely from breakage or deterioration.

Holm made a magnificent mirror, such as would be prized and carefully preserved;and in it deftly fused the strange whorl-configured relic he had acquired. Having thus preparedhis refuge and his trap, he began to plan his mode of entrance and conditions of tenancy. Hewould have with him both servitors and companions; and as an experimental beginning he sentbefore him into the glass two dependable Negro slaves brought from the West Indies. What hissensations must have been upon beholding this first concrete demonstration of his theories,only imagination can conceive.

Undoubtedly a man of his knowledge realized that absence from the outside world,if deferred beyond the natural span of life of those within, must mean instant dissolution atthe first attempt to return to that world. But, barring that misfortune or accidental breakage,those within would remain forever as they were at the time of entrance. They would never growold, and would need neither food nor drink.

To make his prison tolerable he sent ahead of him certain books and writingmaterials, a chair and table of stoutest workmanship, and a few other accessories. He knew thatthe images which the glass would reflect or absorb would not be tangible, but would merely extendaround him like a background of dream. His own transition in 1687 was a momentous experience;and must have been attended by mixed sensations of triumph and terror. Had anything gone wrong,there were frightful possibilities of being lost in dark and inconceivable multiple dimensions.

For over fifty years he had been unable to secure any additions to the littlecompany of himself and slaves, but later on he had perfected his telepathic method of visualizingsmall sections of the outside world close to the glass, and attracting certain individuals inthose areas through the mirror’s strange entrance. Thus Robert, influenced into a desireto press upon the “door,” had been lured within. Such visualizations depended whollyon telepathy, since no one inside the mirror could see out into the world of men.

It was, in truth, a strange life that Holm and his company had lived insidethe glass. Since the mirror had stood for fully a century with its face to the dusty stone wallof the shed where I found it, Robert was the first being to enter this limbo after all thatinterval. His arrival was a gala event, for he brought news of the outside world which musthave been of the most startling impressiveness to the more thoughtful of those within. He, inhis turn—young though he was—felt overwhelmingly the weirdness of meeting and talkingwith persons who had been alive in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

The deadly monotony of life for the prisoners can only be vaguely conjectured.As mentioned, its extensive spatial variety was limited to localities which had been reflectedin the mirror for long periods; and many of these had become dim and strange as tropical climateshad made inroads on the surface. Certain localities were bright and beautiful, and in thesethe company usually gathered. But no scene could be fully satisfying; since the visible objectswere all unreal and intangible, and often of perplexingly indefinite outline. When the tediousperiods of darkness came, the general custom was to indulge in memories, reflections, or conversations.Each one of that strange, pathetic group had retained his or her personality unchanged and unchangeable,since becoming immune to the time effects of outside space.

The number of inanimate objects within the glass, aside from the clothing ofthe prisoners, was very small; being largely limited to the accessories Holm had provided forhimself. The rest did without even furniture, since sleep and fatigue had vanished along withmost other vital attributes. Such inorganic things as were present, seemed as exempt from decayas the living beings. The lower forms of animal life were wholly absent.

Robert derived most of his information from Herr Thiele, the gentleman whospoke English with a Scandinavian accent. This portly Dane had taken a fancy to him, and talkedat considerable length. The others, too, had received him with courtesy and goodwill; Holm himself,seeming well-disposed, had told him about various matters including the door of the trap.

The boy, as he told me later, was sensible enough never to attempt communicationwith me when Holm was nearby. Twice, while thus engaged, he had seen Holm appear; and had accordinglyceased at once. At no time could I see the world behind the mirror’s surface. Robert’svisual image, which included his bodily form and the clothing connected with it, was—likethe aural image of his halting voice and like his own visualization of myself—a case ofpurely telepathic transmission; and did not involve true interdimensional sight. However, hadRobert been as trained a telepathist as Holm, he might have transmitted a few strong imagesapart from his immediate person.

Throughout this period of revelation I had, of course, been desperately tryingto devise a method for Robert’s release. On the fourth day—the ninth after the disappearance—Ihit on a solution. Everything considered, my laboriously formulated process was not a very complicatedone; though I could not tell beforehand how it would work, while the possibility of ruinousconsequences in case of a slip was appalling. This process depended, basically, on the factthat there was no possible exit from inside the glass. If Holm and his prisoners were permanentlysealed in, then release must come wholly from outside. Other considerations included the disposalof the other prisoners, if any survived, and especially of Axel Holm. What Robert had told meof him was anything but reassuring; and I certainly did not wish him loose in my apartment,free once more to work his evil will upon the world. The telepathic messages had not made fullyclear the effect of liberation on those who had entered the glass so long ago.

There was, too, a final though minor problem in case of success—that ofgetting Robert back into the routine of school life without having to explain the incredible.In case of failure, it was highly inadvisable to have witnesses present at the release operations—andlacking these, I simply could not attempt to relate the actual facts if I should succeed. Evento me the reality seemed a mad one whenever I let my mind turn from the data so compellinglypresented in that tense series of dreams.

When I had thought these problems through as far as possible, I procured alarge magnifying-glass from the school laboratory and studied minutely every square millimeterof that whorl-center which presumably marked the extent of the original ancient mirror usedby Holm. Even with this aid I could not quite trace the exact boundary between the old areaand the surface added by the Danish wizard; but after a long study decided on a conjecturaloval boundary which I outlined very precisely with a soft blue pencil. I then made a trip toStamford, where I procured a heavy glass-cutting tool; for my primary idea was to remove theancient and magically potent mirror from its later setting.

My next step was to figure out the best time of day to make the crucial experiment.I finally settled on two-thirty a.m.—both because it was a good season for uninterruptedwork, and because it was the “opposite” of two-thirty p.m., the probable moment atwhich Robert had entered the mirror. This form of “oppositeness” may or may not havebeen relevant, but I knew at least that the chosen hour was as good as any—and perhapsbetter than most.

I finally set to work in the early morning of the eleventh day after the disappearance,having drawn all the shades of my living-room and closed and locked the door into the hallway.Following with breathless care the elliptical line I had traced, I worked around the whorl-sectionwith my steel-wheeled cutting tool. The ancient glass, half an inch thick, crackled crisplyunder the firm, uniform pressure; and upon completing the circuit I cut around it a second time,crunching the roller more deeply into the glass.

Then, very carefully indeed, I lifted the heavy mirror down from its consoleand leaned it face-inward against the wall; prying off two of the thin, narrow boards nailedto the back. With equal caution I smartly tapped the cut-around space with the heavy woodenhandle of the glass-cutter.

At the very first tap the whorl-containing section of glass dropped out onthe Bokhara rug beneath. I did not know what might happen, but was keyed up for anything, andtook a deep involuntary breath. I was on my knees for convenience at the moment, with my facequite near the newly made aperture; and as I breathed there poured into my nostrils a powerfuldusty odor—a smell not comparable to any other I have ever encountered. Then everythingwithin my range of vision suddenly turned to a dull gray before my failing eyesight as I feltmyself overpowered by an invisible force which robbed my muscles of their power to function.

I remember grasping weakly and futilely at the edge of the nearest window draperyand feeling it rip loose from its fastening. Then I sank slowly to the floor as the darknessof oblivion passed over me.

When I regained consciousness I was lying on the Bokhara rug with my legs heldunaccountably up in the air. The room was full of that hideous and inexplicable dusty smell—andas my eyes began to take in definite images I saw that Robert Grandison stood in front of me.It was he—fully in the flesh and with his coloring normal—who was holding my legsaloft to bring the blood back to my head as the school’s first-aid course had taught himto do with persons who had fainted. For a moment I was struck mute by the stifling odor andby a bewilderment which quickly merged into a sense of triumph. Then I found myself able tomove and speak collectedly.

I raised a tentative hand and waved feebly at Robert.

“All right, old man,” I murmured, “you can let my legs downnow. Many thanks. I’m all right again, I think. It was the smell—I imagine—thatgot me. Open that farthest window, please—wide—from the bottom. That’s it—thanks.No—leave the shade down the way it was.”

I struggled to my feet, my disturbed circulation adjusting itself in waves,and stood upright hanging to the back of a big chair. I was still “groggy,” but ablast of fresh, bitterly cold air from the window revived me rapidly. I sat down in the bigchair and looked at Robert, now walking toward me.

“First,” I said hurriedly, “tell me, Robert—those others—Holm?What happened to them, when I—opened the exit?”

Robert paused half-way across the room and looked at me very gravely.

“I saw them fade away—into nothingness—Mr. Canevin,” hesaid with solemnity; “and with them—everything. There isn’t any more ‘inside,’sir—thank God, and you, sir!”

And young Robert, at last yielding to the sustained strain which he had bornethrough all those terrible eleven days, suddenly broke down like a little child and began toweep hysterically in great, stifling, dry sobs.

I picked him up and placed him gently on my davenport, threw a rug over him,sat down by his side, and put a calming hand on his forehead.

“Take it easy, old fellow,” I said soothingly.

The boy’s sudden and very natural hysteria passed as quickly as it hadcome on as I talked to him reassuringly about my plans for his quiet restoration to the school.The interest of the situation and the need of concealing the incredible truth beneath a rationalexplanation took hold of his imagination as I had expected; and at last he sat up eagerly, tellingthe details of his release and listening to the instructions I had thought out. He had, it seems,been in the “projected area” of my bedroom when I opened the way back, and had emergedin that actual room—hardly realizing that he was “out.” Upon hearing a fall inthe living-room he had hastened thither, finding me on the rug in my fainting spell.

I need mention only briefly my method of restoring Robert in a seemingly normalway—how I smuggled him out of the window in an old hat and sweater of mine, took him downthe road in my quietly started car, coached him carefully in a tale I had devised, and returnedto arouse Browne with the news of his discovery. He had, I explained, been walking alone onthe afternoon of his disappearance; and had been offered a motor ride by two young men who,as a joke and over his protests that he could go no farther than Stamford and back, had begunto carry him past that town. Jumping from the car during a traffic stop with the intention ofhitch-hiking back before Call-Over, he had been hit by another car just as the traffic was released—awakeningten days later in the Greenwich home of the people who had hit him. On learning the date, Iadded, he had immediately telephoned the school; and I, being the only one awake, had answeredthe call and hurried after him in my car without stopping to notify anyone.

Browne, who at once telephoned to Robert’s parents, accepted my storywithout question; and forbore to interrogate the boy because of the latter’s manifest exhaustion.It was arranged that he should remain at the school for a rest, under the expert care of Mrs.Browne, a former trained nurse. I naturally saw a good deal of him during the remainder of theChristmas vacation, and was thus enabled to fill in certain gaps in his fragmentary dream-story.

Now and then we would almost doubt the actuality of what had occurred; wonderingwhether we had not both shared some monstrous delusion born of the mirror’s glitteringhypnotism, and whether the tale of the ride and accident were not after all the real truth.But whenever we did so we would be brought back to belief by some monstrous and haunting memory;with me, of Robert’s dream-figure and its thick voice and inverted colors; with him, ofthe whole fantastic pageantry of ancient people and dead scenes that he had witnessed. And thenthere was that joint recollection of that damnable dusty odor.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. We knewwhat it meant: the instant dissolution of those who had entered an alien dimension a centuryand more ago.

There are, in addition, at least two lines of rather more positive evidence;one of which comes through my researches in Danish annals concerning the sorcerer, Axel Holm.Such a person, indeed, left many traces in folklore and written records; and diligent librarysessions, plus conferences with various learned Danes, have shed much more light on his evilfame. At present I need say only that the Copenhagen glass-blower—born in 1612—wasa notorious Luciferian whose pursuits and final vanishing formed a matter of awed debate overtwo centuries ago. He had burned with a desire to know all things and to conquer every limitationof mankind—to which end he had delved deeply into occult and forbidden fields ever sincehe was a child.

He was commonly held to have joined a coven of the dreaded witch-cult, andthe vast lore of ancient Scandinavian myth—with its Loki the Sly One and the accursed Fenris-Wolf—wassoon an open book to him. He had strange interests and objectives, few of which were definitelyknown, but some of which were recognized as intolerably evil. It is recorded that his two Negrohelpers, originally slaves from the Danish West Indies, had become mute soon after their acquisitionby him; and that they had disappeared not long before his own disappearance from the ken ofmankind.

Near the close of an already long life the idea of a glass of immortality appearsto have entered his mind. That he had acquired an enchanted mirror of inconceivable antiquitywas a matter of common whispering; it being alleged that he had purloined it from a fellow-sorcererwho had entrusted it to him for polishing.

This mirror—according to popular tales a trophy as potent in its way asthe better-known Aegis of Minerva or Hammer of Thor—was a small oval object called “Loki’sGlass,” made of some polished fusible mineral and having magical properties which includedthe divination of the immediate future and the power to show the possessor his enemies. Thatit had deeper potential properties, realizable in the hands of an erudite magician, none ofthe common people doubted; and even educated persons attached much fearful importance to Holm’srumored attempts to incorporate it in a larger glass of immortality. Then had come the wizard’sdisappearance in 1687, and the final sale and dispersal of his goods amidst a growing cloudof fantastic legendry. It was, altogether, just such a story as one would laugh at if possessedof no particular key; yet to me, remembering those dream messages and having Robert Grandison’scorroboration before me, it formed a positive confirmation of all the bewildering marvels thathad been unfolded.

But as I have said, there is still another line of rather positive evidence—ofa very different character—at my disposal. Two days after his release, as Robert, greatlyimproved in strength and appearance, was placing a log on my living-room fire, I noticed a certainawkwardness in his motions and was struck by a persistent idea. Summoning him to my desk I suddenlyasked him to pick up an ink-stand—and was scarcely surprised to note that, despite lifelongright-handedness, he obeyed unconsciously with his left hand. Without alarming him, I then askedthat he unbutton his coat and let me listen to his cardiac action. What I found upon placingmy ear to his chest—and what I did not tell him for some time afterward—was that his heart was beating on his right side.

He had gone into the glass right-handed and with all organs in their normalpositions. Now he was left-handed and with organs reversed, and would doubtless continue sofor the rest of his life. Clearly, the dimensional transition had been no illusion—forthis physical change was tangible and unmistakable. Had there been a natural exit from the glass,Robert would probably have undergone a thorough re-reversal and emerged in perfect normality—asindeed the color-scheme of his body and clothing did emerge. The forcible nature of his release,however, undoubtedly set something awry; so that dimensions no longer had a chance to rightthemselves as chromatic wave-frequencies still did.

I had not merely opened Holm’s trap; I had destroyed it;and at the particular stage of destruction marked by Robert’s escape some of the reversingproperties had perished. It is significant that in escaping Robert had felt no pain comparableto that experienced in entering. Had the destruction been still more sudden, I shiver to thinkof the monstrosities of color the boy would always have been forced to bear. I may add thatafter discovering Robert’s reversal I examined the rumpled and discarded clothing he hadworn in the glass, and found, as I had expected, a complete reversal of pockets, buttons, andall other corresponding details.

At this moment Loki’s Glass, just as it fell on my Bokhara rug from thenow patched and harmless mirror, weighs down a sheaf of papers on my writing-table here in St.Thomas, venerable capital of the Danish West Indies—now the American Virgin Islands. Variouscollectors of old Sandwich glass have mistaken it for an odd bit of that early American product—butI privately realize that my paper-weight is an antique of far subtler and more paleogean craftsmanship.Still, I do not disillusion such enthusiasts.
