“Fata viam invenient.”

On a verdant slope of Mount Maenalus, in Arcadia, there stands an olive grove about the ruinsof a villa. Close by is a tomb, once beautiful with the sublimest sculptures, but now falleninto as great decay as the house. At one end of that tomb, its curious roots displacing thetime-stained blocks of Pentelic marble, grows an unnaturally large olive tree of oddly repellentshape; so like to some grotesque man, or death-distorted body of a man, that the country folkfear to pass it at night when the moon shines faintly through the crooked boughs. Mount Maenalusis a chosen haunt of dreaded Pan, whose queer companions are many, and simple swains believethat the tree must have some hideous kinship to these weird Panisci; but an old bee-keeper wholives in the neighbouring cottage told me a different story.

Many years ago, when the hillside villa was new and resplendent, there dweltwithin it the two sculptors Kalos and Musides. From Lydia to Neapolis the beauty of their workwas praised, and none dared say that the one excelled the other in skill. The Hermes of Kalosstood in a marble shrine in Corinth, and the Pallas of Musides surmounted a pillar in Athens,near the Parthenon. All men paid homage to Kalos and Musides, and marvelled that no shadow ofartistic jealousy cooled the warmth of their brotherly friendship.

But though Kalos and Musides dwelt in unbroken harmony, their natures werenot alike. Whilst Musides revelled by night amidst the urban gaieties of Tegea, Kalos wouldremain at home; stealing away from the sight of his slaves into the cool recesses of the olivegrove. There he would meditate upon the visions that filled his mind, and there devise the formsof beauty which later became immortal in breathing marble. Idle folk, indeed, said that Kalosconversed with the spirits of the grove, and that his statues were but images of the fauns anddryads he met there—for he patterned his work after no living model.

So famous were Kalos and Musides, that none wondered when the Tyrant of Syracusesent to them deputies to speak of the costly statue of Tyché which he had planned forhis city. Of great size and cunning workmanship must the statue be, for it was to form a wonderof nations and a goal of travellers. Exalted beyond thought would be he whose work should gainacceptance, and for this honour Kalos and Musides were invited to compete. Their brotherly lovewas well known, and the crafty Tyrant surmised that each, instead of concealing his work fromthe other, would offer aid and advice; this charity producing two images of unheard-of beauty,the lovelier of which would eclipse even the dreams of poets.

With joy the sculptors hailed the Tyrant’s offer, so that in the daysthat followed their slaves heard the ceaseless blows of chisels. Not from each other did Kalosand Musides conceal their work, but the sight was for them alone. Saving theirs, no eyes beheldthe two divine figures released by skilful blows from the rough blocks that had imprisoned themsince the world began.

At night, as of yore, Musides sought the banquet halls of Tegea whilst Kaloswandered alone in the olive grove. But as time passed, men observed a want of gaiety in theonce sparkling Musides. It was strange, they said amongst themselves, that depression shouldthus seize one with so great a chance to win art’s loftiest reward. Many months passed,yet in the sour face of Musides came nothing of the sharp expectancy which the situation shouldarouse.

Then one day Musides spoke of the illness of Kalos, after which none marvelledagain at his sadness, since the sculptors’ attachment was known to be deep and sacred.Subsequently many went to visit Kalos, and indeed noticed the pallor of his face; but therewas about him a happy serenity which made his glance more magical than the glance of Musides—whowas clearly distracted with anxiety, and who pushed aside all the slaves in his eagerness tofeed and wait upon his friend with his own hands. Hidden behind heavy curtains stood the twounfinished figures of Tyché, little touched of late by the sick man and his faithfulattendant.

As Kalos grew inexplicably weaker and weaker despite the ministrations of puzzledphysicians and of his assiduous friend, he desired to be carried often to the grove which heso loved. There he would ask to be left alone, as if wishing to speak with unseen things. Musidesever granted his requests, though his eyes filled with visible tears at the thought that Kalosshould care more for the fauns and the dryads than for him. At last the end drew near, and Kalosdiscoursed of things beyond this life. Musides, weeping, promised him a sepulchre more lovelythan the tomb of Mausolus; but Kalos bade him speak no more of marble glories. Only one wishnow haunted the mind of the dying man; that twigs from certain olive trees in the grove be buriedby his resting-place—close to his head. And one night, sitting alone in the darkness ofthe olive grove, Kalos died.

Beautiful beyond words was the marble sepulchre which stricken Musides carvedfor his beloved friend. None but Kalos himself could have fashioned such bas-reliefs, whereinwere displayed all the splendours of Elysium. Nor did Musides fail to bury close to Kalos’head the olive twigs from the grove.

As the first violence of Musides’ grief gave place to resignation, helaboured with diligence upon his figure of Tyché. All honour was now his, since the Tyrantof Syracuse would have the work of none save him or Kalos. His task proved a vent for his emotion,and he toiled more steadily each day, shunning the gaieties he once had relished. Meanwhilehis evenings were spent beside the tomb of his friend, where a young olive tree had sprung upnear the sleeper’s head. So swift was the growth of this tree, and so strange was itsform, that all who beheld it exclaimed in surprise; and Musides seemed at once fascinated andrepelled.

Three years after the death of Kalos, Musides despatched a messenger to theTyrant, and it was whispered in the agora at Tegea that the mighty statue was finished. By thistime the tree by the tomb had attained amazing proportions, exceeding all other trees of itskind, and sending out a singularly heavy branch above the apartment in which Musides laboured.As many visitors came to view the prodigious tree, as to admire the art of the sculptor, sothat Musides was seldom alone. But he did not mind his multitude of guests; indeed, he seemedto dread being alone now that his absorbing work was done. The bleak mountain wind, sighingthrough the olive grove and the tomb-tree, had an uncanny way of forming vaguely articulatesounds.

The sky was dark on the evening that the Tyrant’s emissaries came toTegea. It was definitely known that they had come to bear away the great image of Tychéand bring eternal honour to Musides, so their reception by the proxenoi was of great warmth.As the night wore on, a violent storm of wind broke over the crest of Maenalus, and the menfrom far Syracuse were glad that they rested snugly in the town. They talked of their illustriousTyrant, and of the splendour of his capital; and exulted in the glory of the statue which Musideshad wrought for him. And then the men of Tegea spoke of the goodness of Musides, and of hisheavy grief for his friend; and how not even the coming laurels of art could console him inthe absence of Kalos, who might have worn those laurels instead. Of the tree which grew by thetomb, near the head of Kalos, they also spoke. The wind shrieked more horribly, and both theSyracusans and the Arcadians prayed to Aiolos.

In the sunshine of the morning the proxenoi led the Tyrant’s messengersup the slope to the abode of the sculptor, but the night-wind had done strange things. Slaves’cries ascended from a scene of desolation, and no more amidst the olive grove rose the gleamingcolonnades of that vast hall wherein Musides had dreamed and toiled. Lone and shaken mournedthe humble courts and the lower walls, for upon the sumptuous greater peristyle had fallen squarelythe heavy overhanging bough of the strange new tree, reducing the stately poem in marble withodd completeness to a mound of unsightly ruins. Strangers and Tegeans stood aghast, lookingfrom the wreckage to the great, sinister tree whose aspect was so weirdly human and whose rootsreached so queerly into the sculptured sepulchre of Kalos. And their fear and dismay increasedwhen they searched the fallen apartment; for of the gentle Musides, and of the marvellouslyfashioned image of Tyché, no trace could be discovered. Amidst such stupendous ruin onlychaos dwelt, and the representatives of two cities left disappointed; Syracusans that they hadno statue to bear home, Tegeans that they had no artist to crown. However, the Syracusans obtainedafter a while a very splendid statue in Athens, and the Tegeans consoled themselves by erectingin the agora a marble temple commemorating the gifts, virtues, and brotherly piety of Musides.

But the olive grove still stands, as does the tree growing out of the tombof Kalos, and the old bee-keeper told me that sometimes the boughs whisper to one another inthe night-wind, saying over and over again, “Οἶδα!Οἶδα!—I know! I know!”
