[Note: Barlow’s contributions are in brackets.]

On the eve of the year 2001 a vast crowd of interested spectators were present amidst the romanticruins of Cohen’s Garage, on the former site of New York, to witness a fistic encounter betweentwo renowned champions of the strange-story firmament—Two-Gun Bob, the Terror of the Plains,and Knockout Bernie, the Wild Wolf of West Shokan. [The Wolf was fresh from his correspondencecourse in physical training, sold to him by Mr. Arthur Leeds.] Before the battle the auguries weredetermined by the venerated Thibetan Lama Bill Lum Li, who evoked the primal serpent-god of Valusiaand found unmistakable signs of victory for both sides. Cream-puffs were inattentively vended byWladislaw Brenryk—the partakers being treated by the official surgeons, Drs. D. H. Killer andM. Gin Brewery.

The gong was sounded at 39 o’clock, after which the air grew red with thegore of battle, lavishly flung about by the mighty Texas slaughterer. Very shortly the first actualdamage occurred—the loosening of several teeth in both participants. One, bouncing out fromthe Wolf’s mouth after a casual tap from Two-Gun, described a parabola toward Yucatan; beingretrieved in a hasty expedition by Messrs. A. Hijacked Barrell and G. A. Scotland. This incidentwas used by the eminent sociologist and ex-poet Frank Chimesleep Short, Jr., as the basis of aballad of proletarian propaganda with three intentionally defective lines. Meanwhile a potentatefrom a neighbouring kingdom, the Effjay of Akkamin (also known to himself as an amateur critic),expressed his frenzied disgust at the technique of the combatants, at the same time peddlingphotographs of the fighters (with himself in the foreground) at five cents each.

In round two the Shokan Soaker’s sturdy right crashed through theTexan’s ribs and became entangled in sundry viscera; thereby enabling Two-Gun to get inseveral telling blows on his opponent’s unprotected chin. Bob was greatly annoyed by theeffeminate squeamishness shewn by several onlookers as muscles, glands, gore, and bits of fleshwere spattered over the ringside. During this round the eminent magazine-cover anatomist Mrs. M.Blunderage portrayed the battlers as a pair of spirited nudes behind a thin veil of convenientlycurling tobacco-smoke, while the late Mr. C. Half-Cent provided a sketch of three Chinamen clad insilk hats and galoshes—this being his own original conception of the affray. Among the amateursketches made was one by Mr. Goofy Hooey, which later gained fame in the annual Cubist exhibit as“Abstraction of an Eradicated Pudding”.

In the third round the fight grew really rough; several ears and otherappurtenances being wholly or partially detached from the frontier battler by the Shokan Shocker.Somewhat irritated, Two-Gun countered with some exceptionally sharp blows; severing many fragmentsfrom his aggressor, who continued to fight with all his remaining members. [At this stage theaudience gave signs of much nervous excitement—instances of trampling and goring beingfrequent. The more enthusiastic members were placed in the custody of Mr. Harry Brobst of theButler Hospital for Mental Diseases.]

The entire affair was reported by Mr. W. Lablache Talcum, his copy being revisedby Horse Power Hateart. Throughout the event notes were taken by M. le Comte d’Erlette for a200-volume novel-cycle in the Proustian manner, to be entitled Morning in September, withillustrations by Mrs. Blunderage. Mr. J. Caesar Warts frequently interviewed both battlers and allthe more important spectators; obtaining as souvenirs (after a spirited struggle with the Effjay)an autographed quarter-rib of Two-Gun’s, in an excellent state of preservation, and threefinger-nails from the Wild Wolf. Lighting effects were supplied by the Electrical TestingLaboratories under the supervision of H. Kanebrake. The fourth round was prolonged eight hours atthe request of the official artist, Mr. H. Wanderer, who wished to put certain shadings of fantasyinto his representation of the Wolf’s depleted physiognomy, which included severalsupernumerary details supplied by the imagination.

The climax came in round five, when the Texas Tearer’s left passed entirelythrough Battling Bernie’s face and brought both sluggers to the mat. This was adjudged afinish by the referee—Robertieff Essovitch Karovsky, the Muscovite Ambassador—who, inview of the Shokan Shocker’s gory state, declared the latter to be essentially liquidatedaccording to the Marxian ideology. The Wild Wolf entered an official protest, which was promptlyoverruled on the ground that all the points necessary to technical death were theoreticallypresent.

The gonfalons sounded a fanfare of triumph for the victor, while the technicallyvanquished was committed to the care of the official mortician, Mr. Teaberry Quince. During theceremonies the theoretical corpse strolled away for a bite of bologna, but a tasteful cenotaph wassupplied to furnish a focus for the rites. The funeral procession was headed by a gaily bedeckedhearse driven by Malik Taus, the Peacock Sultan, who sat on the box in West Point uniform andturban, and steered an expert course over several formidable hedges and stone walls. About half wayto the cemetery the cortège was rejoined by the corpse, who sat beside Sultan Malik on the box andfinished his bologna sandwich—his ample girth having made it impossible to enter the hastilyselected cenotaph. An appropriate dirge was rendered by Maestro Sing Lee Bawledout on the piccolo;Messrs. De Silva, Brown, and Henderson’s celebrated aria, “Never Swat a Fly”, fromthe old cantata Just Imagine, being chosen for the occasion. The only detail omitted fromthe funeral was the interment, which was interrupted by the disconcerting news that the officialgate-taker—the celebrated financier and publisher Ivar K. Rodent, Esq.—had absconded withthe entire proceeds. [This omission was regretted chiefly by the Rev. D. Vest Wind, who was therebyforced to leave unspoken a long and moving sermon revised expressly for the celebration from aformer discourse delivered at the burial of a favourite horse.]

Mr. Talcum’s report of the event, illustrated by the well-known artistKlarkash-Ton (who esoterically depicted the fighters as boneless fungi), was printed after repeatedrejections by the discriminating editor of the Windy City Grab-Bag—as a broadside by W.Peter Chef[, with typographical supervision by Vrest Orton.]. This, through the efforts of OtisAdelbert Kline, was finally placed on sale in the bookshop of Smearum &amp; Weep, three and a halfcopies finally being disposed of through the alluring catalogue description supplied by SamuelusPhilanthropus, Esq.

In response to this wide demand, the text was finally reprinted by Mr. De Merit inthe polychromatic pages of Wurst’s Weakly Americana under the title “Has ScienceBeen Outmoded? or, The Millers in the Garage”. No copies, however, remain in circulation;since all which were not snapped up by fanatical bibliophiles were seized by the police inconnexion with the libel suit of the Wild Wolf, who was, after several appeals ending with theWorld Court, adjudged not only officially alive but the clear winner of the combat.

[Glossary of Names—Ed.

Two-Gun Bob—Robert E. Howard

Knockout Bernie, the Wild Wolf of West Shokan—Bernard Austin Dwyer, of West Shokan, N.Y.

Bill Lum Li—William Lumley

Wladislaw Brenryk—H. Warner Munn

D. H. Killer—David H. Keller

M. Gin Brewery—Miles G. Breuer

A. Hijacked Barrell—A. Hyatt Verrill

G. A. Scotland—George Allan England

Frank Chimesleep Short, Jr—Frank Belknap Long, Jr.

The Effjoy of Akkamin—Forrest J. Ackerman

Mrs. M. Blunderage—Margaret Brundage (artist for Weird Tales)

Mr. C. Half-Cent—C. C. Senf (artist for Weird Tales)

Mr. Goofy Hooey—Hugh Rankin (artist for Weird Tales)

W. Lablache Talcum—Wilfred Blanch Talman

Horse Power Hateart—Howard Phillips Lovecraft

M. le Comte d’Erlette—August Derleth (author of Evening in Spring)

J. Caesar Warts—Julius Schwartz

H. Kanebrake—H. C. Koenig (employed by the Electrical Testing Laboratories)

H. Wanderer—Howard Wandrei

Robertieff Essovitch Karovsky—Robert S. Carr

Teaberry Quince—Seabury Quinn

Malik Taus, the Peacock Sultan—E. Hoffmann Price

Sing Lee Bawledout—F. Lee Baldwin

Ivor K. Rodent—Hugo Gernsback

Rev. D. Vest Wind—Unknown

Klarkash-Ton—Clark Ashton Smith

Windy City Grab-Bag—Weird Tales

W. Peter Chef—W. Paul Cook

Smearum &amp; Weep—Dauber &amp; Pine

Samuelus Philanthropus—Samuel Loveman

Mr. De Merit—A. Merritt (author of The Dwellers in the Mirage)

Wurst’s Weekly Americana—Hearst’s American Weekly]
