(Manuscript found on the coast of Yucatan.)

On August 20, 1917, I, Karl Heinrich, Graf von Altberg-Ehrenstein, Lieutenant-Commander in theImperial German Navy and in charge of the submarine U-29, deposit this bottle and record inthe Atlantic Ocean at a point to me unknown but probably about N. Latitude 20°, W. Longitude35°, where my ship lies disabled on the ocean floor. I do so because of my desire to setcertain unusual facts before the public; a thing I shall not in all probability survive to accomplishin person, since the circumstances surrounding me are as menacing as they are extraordinary,and involve not only the hopeless crippling of the U-29, but the impairment of my iron Germanwill in a manner most disastrous.

On the afternoon of June 18, as reported by wireless to the U-61, bound forKiel, we torpedoed the British freighter Victory, New York to Liverpool, in N. Latitude45° 16′, W. Longitude 28° 34′; permitting the crew to leave in boats in orderto obtain a good cinema view for the admiralty records. The ship sank quite picturesquely, bowfirst, the stern rising high out of the water whilst the hull shot down perpendicularly to thebottom of the sea. Our camera missed nothing, and I regret that so fine a reel of film should neverreach Berlin. After that we sank the lifeboats with our guns and submerged.

When we rose to the surface about sunset a seaman’s body was found onthe deck, hands gripping the railing in curious fashion. The poor fellow was young, rather dark,and very handsome; probably an Italian or Greek, and undoubtedly of the Victory’screw. He had evidently sought refuge on the very ship which had been forced to destroy his own—onemore victim of the unjust war of aggression which the English pig-dogs are waging upon the Fatherland.Our men searched him for souvenirs, and found in his coat pocket a very odd bit of ivory carvedto represent a youth’s head crowned with laurel. My fellow-officer, Lieut. Klenze, believedthat the thing was of great age and artistic value, so took it from the men for himself. Howit had ever come into the possession of a common sailor, neither he nor I could imagine.

As the dead man was thrown overboard there occurred two incidents which createdmuch disturbance amongst the crew. The fellow’s eyes had been closed; but in the draggingof his body to the rail they were jarred open, and many seemed to entertain a queer delusionthat they gazed steadily and mockingly at Schmidt and Zimmer, who were bent over the corpse.The Boatswain Müller, an elderly man who would have known better had he not been a superstitiousAlsatian swine, became so excited by this impression that he watched the body in the water;and swore that after it sank a little it drew its limbs into a swimming position and sped awayto the south under the waves. Klenze and I did not like these displays of peasant ignorance,and severely reprimanded the men, particularly Müller.

The next day a very troublesome situation was created by the indispositionof some of the crew. They were evidently suffering from the nervous strain of our long voyage,and had had bad dreams. Several seemed quite dazed and stupid; and after satisfying myself thatthey were not feigning their weakness, I excused them from their duties. The sea was ratherrough, so we descended to a depth where the waves were less troublesome. Here we were comparativelycalm, despite a somewhat puzzling southward current which we could not identify from our oceanographiccharts. The moans of the sick men were decidedly annoying; but since they did not appear todemoralise the rest of the crew, we did not resort to extreme measures. It was our plan to remainwhere we were and intercept the liner Dacia, mentioned in information from agentsin New York.

In the early evening we rose to the surface, and found the sea less heavy.The smoke of a battleship was on the northern horizon, but our distance and ability to submergemade us safe. What worried us more was the talk of Boatswain Müller, which grew wilderas night came on. He was in a detestably childish state, and babbled of some illusion of deadbodies drifting past the undersea portholes; bodies which looked at him intensely, and whichhe recognised in spite of bloating as having seen dying during some of our victorious Germanexploits. And he said that the young man we had found and tossed overboard was their leader.This was very gruesome and abnormal, so we confined Müller in irons and had him soundlywhipped. The men were not pleased at his punishment, but discipline was necessary. We also deniedthe request of a delegation headed by Seaman Zimmer, that the curious carved ivory head be castinto the sea.

On June 20, Seamen Bohm and Schmidt, who had been ill the day before, becameviolently insane. I regretted that no physician was included in our complement of officers,since German lives are precious; but the constant ravings of the two concerning a terrible cursewere most subversive of discipline, so drastic steps were taken. The crew accepted the eventin a sullen fashion, but it seemed to quiet Müller; who thereafter gave us no trouble.In the evening we released him, and he went about his duties silently.

In the week that followed we were all very nervous, watching for the Dacia.The tension was aggravated by the disappearance of Müller and Zimmer, who undoubtedly committedsuicide as a result of the fears which had seemed to harass them, though they were not observedin the act of jumping overboard. I was rather glad to be rid of Müller, for even his silencehad unfavourably affected the crew. Everyone seemed inclined to be silent now, as though holdinga secret fear. Many were ill, but none made a disturbance. Lieut. Klenze chafed under the strain,and was annoyed by the merest trifles—such as the school of dolphins which gathered aboutthe U-29 in increasing numbers, and the growing intensity of that southward current which wasnot on our chart.

It at length became apparent that we had missed the Dacia altogether.Such failures are not uncommon, and we were more pleased than disappointed; since our returnto Wilhelmshaven was now in order. At noon June 28 we turned northeastward, and despite somerather comical entanglements with the unusual masses of dolphins were soon under way.

The explosion in the engine room at 2 P.M. was wholly a surprise. No defectin the machinery or carelessness in the men had been noticed, yet without warning the ship wasracked from end to end with a colossal shock. Lieut. Klenze hurried to the engine room, findingthe fuel-tank and most of the mechanism shattered, and Engineers Raabe and Schneider instantlykilled. Our situation had suddenly become grave indeed; for though the chemical air regeneratorswere intact, and though we could use the devices for raising and submerging the ship and openingthe hatches as long as compressed air and storage batteries might hold out, we were powerlessto propel or guide the submarine. To seek rescue in the lifeboats would be to deliver ourselvesinto the hands of enemies unreasonably embittered against our great German nation, and our wirelesshad failed ever since the Victory affair to put us in touch with a fellow U-boat of theImperial Navy.

From the hour of the accident till July 2 we drifted constantly to the south,almost without plans and encountering no vessel. Dolphins still encircled the U-29, a somewhatremarkable circumstance considering the distance we had covered. On the morning of July 2 wesighted a warship flying American colours, and the men became very restless in their desireto surrender. Finally Lieut. Klenze had to shoot a seaman named Traube, who urged this un-Germanact with especial violence. This quieted the crew for the time, and we submerged unseen.

The next afternoon a dense flock of sea-birds appeared from the south, andthe ocean began to heave ominously. Closing our hatches, we awaited developments until we realisedthat we must either submerge or be swamped in the mounting waves. Our air pressure and electricitywere diminishing, and we wished to avoid all unnecessary use of our slender mechanical resources;but in this case there was no choice. We did not descend far, and when after several hours thesea was calmer, we decided to return to the surface. Here, however, a new trouble developed;for the ship failed to respond to our direction in spite of all that the mechanics could do.As the men grew more frightened at this undersea imprisonment, some of them began to mutteragain about Lieut. Klenze’s ivory image, but the sight of an automatic pistol calmed them.We kept the poor devils as busy as we could, tinkering at the machinery even when we knew itwas useless.

Klenze and I usually slept at different times; and it was during my sleep,about 5 A.M., July 4, that the general mutiny broke loose. The six remaining pigs of seamen,suspecting that we were lost, had suddenly burst into a mad fury at our refusal to surrenderto the Yankee battleship two days before; and were in a delirium of cursing and destruction.They roared like the animals they were, and broke instruments and furniture indiscriminately;screaming about such nonsense as the curse of the ivory image and the dark dead youth who lookedat them and swam away. Lieut. Klenze seemed paralysed and inefficient, as one might expect ofa soft, womanish Rhinelander. I shot all six men, for it was necessary, and made sure that noneremained alive.

We expelled the bodies through the double hatches and were alone in the U-29.Klenze seemed very nervous, and drank heavily. It was decided that we remain alive as long aspossible, using the large stock of provisions and chemical supply of oxygen, none of which hadsuffered from the crazy antics of those swine-hound seamen. Our compasses, depth gauges, andother delicate instruments were ruined; so that henceforth our only reckoning would be guesswork,based on our watches, the calendar, and our apparent drift as judged by any objects we mightspy through the portholes or from the conning tower. Fortunately we had storage batteries stillcapable of long use, both for interior lighting and for the searchlight. We often cast a beamaround the ship, but saw only dolphins, swimming parallel to our own drifting course. I wasscientifically interested in those dolphins; for though the ordinary Delphinus delphisis a cetacean mammal, unable to subsist without air, I watched one of the swimmers closely fortwo hours, and did not see him alter his submerged condition.

With the passage of time Klenze and I decided that we were still drifting south,meanwhile sinking deeper and deeper. We noted the marine fauna and flora, and read much on thesubject in the books I had carried with me for spare moments. I could not help observing, however,the inferior scientific knowledge of my companion. His mind was not Prussian, but given to imaginingsand speculations which have no value. The fact of our coming death affected him curiously, andhe would frequently pray in remorse over the men, women, and children we had sent to the bottom;forgetting that all things are noble which serve the German state. After a time he became noticeablyunbalanced, gazing for hours at his ivory image and weaving fanciful stories of the lost andforgotten things under the sea. Sometimes, as a psychological experiment, I would lead him onin these wanderings, and listen to his endless poetical quotations and tales of sunken ships.I was very sorry for him, for I dislike to see a German suffer; but he was not a good man todie with. For myself I was proud, knowing how the Fatherland would revere my memory and howmy sons would be taught to be men like me.

On August 9, we espied the ocean floor, and sent a powerful beam from the searchlightover it. It was a vast undulating plain, mostly covered with seaweed, and strown with the shellsof small molluscs. Here and there were slimy objects of puzzling contour, draped with weedsand encrusted with barnacles, which Klenze declared must be ancient ships lying in their graves.He was puzzled by one thing, a peak of solid matter, protruding above the ocean bed nearly fourfeet at its apex; about two feet thick, with flat sides and smooth upper surfaces which metat a very obtuse angle. I called the peak a bit of outcropping rock, but Klenze thought he sawcarvings on it. After a while he began to shudder, and turned away from the scene as if frightened;yet could give no explanation save that he was overcome with the vastness, darkness, remoteness,antiquity, and mystery of the oceanic abysses. His mind was tired, but I am always a German,and was quick to notice two things; that the U-29 was standing the deep-sea pressure splendidly,and that the peculiar dolphins were still about us, even at a depth where the existence of highorganisms is considered impossible by most naturalists. That I had previously overestimatedour depth, I was sure; but none the less we must still be deep enough to make these phenomenaremarkable. Our southward speed, as gauged by the ocean floor, was about as I had estimatedfrom the organisms passed at higher levels.

It was at 3:15 P.M., August 12, that poor Klenze went wholly mad. He had beenin the conning tower using the searchlight when I saw him bound into the library compartmentwhere I sat reading, and his face at once betrayed him. I will repeat here what he said, underliningthe words he emphasised: “He is calling! He is calling! Ihear him! We must go!” As he spoke he took his ivory image from the table, pocketed it,and seized my arm in an effort to drag me up the companionway to the deck. In a moment I understoodthat he meant to open the hatch and plunge with me into the water outside, a vagary of suicidaland homicidal mania for which I was scarcely prepared. As I hung back and attempted to soothehim he grew more violent, saying: “Come now—do not wait until later; it is betterto repent and be forgiven than to defy and be condemned.” Then I tried the opposite ofthe soothing plan, and told him he was mad—pitifully demented. But he was unmoved, andcried: “If I am mad, it is mercy! May the gods pity the man who in his callousness canremain sane to the hideous end! Come and be mad whilst he still calls with mercy!”

This outburst seemed to relieve a pressure in his brain; for as he finishedhe grew much milder, asking me to let him depart alone if I would not accompany him. My courseat once became clear. He was a German, but only a Rhinelander and a commoner; and he was nowa potentially dangerous madman. By complying with his suicidal request I could immediately freemyself from one who was no longer a companion but a menace. I asked him to give me the ivoryimage before he went, but this request brought from him such uncanny laughter that I did notrepeat it. Then I asked him if he wished to leave any keepsake or lock of hair for his familyin Germany in case I should be rescued, but again he gave me that strange laugh. So as he climbedthe ladder I went to the levers, and allowing proper time-intervals operated the machinery whichsent him to his death. After I saw that he was no longer in the boat I threw the searchlightaround the water in an effort to obtain a last glimpse of him; since I wished to ascertain whetherthe water-pressure would flatten him as it theoretically should, or whether the body would beunaffected, like those extraordinary dolphins. I did not, however, succeed in finding my latecompanion, for the dolphins were massed thickly and obscuringly about the conning tower.

That evening I regretted that I had not taken the ivory image surreptitiouslyfrom poor Klenze’s pocket as he left, for the memory of it fascinated me. I could notforget the youthful, beautiful head with its leafy crown, though I am not by nature an artist.I was also sorry that I had no one with whom to converse. Klenze, though not my mental equal,was much better than no one. I did not sleep well that night, and wondered exactly when theend would come. Surely, I had little enough chance of rescue.

The next day I ascended to the conning tower and commenced the customary searchlightexplorations. Northward the view was much the same as it had been all the four days since wehad sighted the bottom, but I perceived that the drifting of the U-29 was less rapid. As I swungthe beam around to the south, I noticed that the ocean floor ahead fell away in a marked declivity,and bore curiously regular blocks of stone in certain places, disposed as if in accordance withdefinite patterns. The boat did not at once descend to match the greater ocean depth, so I wassoon forced to adjust the searchlight to cast a sharply downward beam. Owing to the abruptnessof the change a wire was disconnected, which necessitated a delay of many minutes for repairs;but at length the light streamed on again, flooding the marine valley below me.

I am not given to emotion of any kind, but my amazement was very great whenI saw what lay revealed in that electrical glow. And yet as one reared in the best Kulturof Prussia I should not have been amazed, for geology and tradition alike tell us of great transpositionsin oceanic and continental areas. What I saw was an extended and elaborate array of ruined edifices;all of magnificent though unclassified architecture, and in various stages of preservation.Most appeared to be of marble, gleaming whitely in the rays of the searchlight, and the generalplan was of a large city at the bottom of a narrow valley, with numerous isolated temples andvillas on the steep slopes above. Roofs were fallen and columns were broken, but there stillremained an air of immemorially ancient splendour which nothing could efface.

Confronted at last with the Atlantis I had formerly deemed largely a myth,I was the most eager of explorers. At the bottom of that valley a river once had flowed; foras I examined the scene more closely I beheld the remains of stone and marble bridges and sea-walls,and terraces and embankments once verdant and beautiful. In my enthusiasm I became nearly asidiotic and sentimental as poor Klenze, and was very tardy in noticing that the southward currenthad ceased at last, allowing the U-29 to settle slowly down upon the sunken city as an aëroplanesettles upon a town of the upper earth. I was slow, too, in realising that the school of unusualdolphins had vanished.

In about two hours the boat rested in a paved plaza close to the rocky wallof the valley. On one side I could view the entire city as it sloped from the plaza down tothe old river-bank; on the other side, in startling proximity, I was confronted by the richlyornate and perfectly preserved facade of a great building, evidently a temple, hollowed fromthe solid rock. Of the original workmanship of this titanic thing I can only make conjectures.The facade, of immense magnitude, apparently covers a continuous hollow recess; for its windowsare many and widely distributed. In the centre yawns a great open door, reached by an impressiveflight of steps, and surrounded by exquisite carvings like the figures of Bacchanals in relief.Foremost of all are the great columns and frieze, both decorated with sculptures of inexpressiblebeauty; obviously portraying idealised pastoral scenes and processions of priests and priestessesbearing strange ceremonial devices in adoration of a radiant god. The art is of the most phenomenalperfection, largely Hellenic in idea, yet strangely individual. It imparts an impression ofterrible antiquity, as though it were the remotest rather than the immediate ancestor of Greekart. Nor can I doubt that every detail of this massive product was fashioned from the virginhillside rock of our planet. It is palpably a part of the valley wall, though how the vast interiorwas ever excavated I cannot imagine. Perhaps a cavern or series of caverns furnished the nucleus.Neither age nor submersion has corroded the pristine grandeur of this awful fane—for faneindeed it must be—and today after thousands of years it rests untarnished and inviolatein the endless night and silence of an ocean chasm.

I cannot reckon the number of hours I spent in gazing at the sunken city withits buildings, arches, statues, and bridges, and the colossal temple with its beauty and mystery.Though I knew that death was near, my curiosity was consuming; and I threw the searchlight’sbeam about in eager quest. The shaft of light permitted me to learn many details, but refusedto shew anything within the gaping door of the rock-hewn temple; and after a time I turned offthe current, conscious of the need of conserving power. The rays were now perceptibly dimmerthan they had been during the weeks of drifting. And as if sharpened by the coming deprivationof light, my desire to explore the watery secrets grew. I, a German, should be the first totread those aeon-forgotten ways!

I produced and examined a deep-sea diving suit of joined metal, and experimentedwith the portable light and air regenerator. Though I should have trouble in managing the doublehatches alone, I believed I could overcome all obstacles with my scientific skill and actuallywalk about the dead city in person.

On August 16 I effected an exit from the U-29, and laboriously made my waythrough the ruined and mud-choked streets to the ancient river. I found no skeletons or otherhuman remains, but gleaned a wealth of archaeological lore from sculptures and coins. Of thisI cannot now speak save to utter my awe at a culture in the full noon of glory when cave-dwellersroamed Europe and the Nile flowed unwatched to the sea. Others, guided by this manuscript ifit shall ever be found, must unfold the mysteries at which I can only hint. I returned to theboat as my electric batteries grew feeble, resolved to explore the rock temple on the followingday.

On the 17th, as my impulse to search out the mystery of the temple waxed stillmore insistent, a great disappointment befell me; for I found that the materials needed to replenishthe portable light had perished in the mutiny of those pigs in July. My rage was unbounded,yet my German sense forbade me to venture unprepared into an utterly black interior which mightprove the lair of some indescribable marine monster or a labyrinth of passages from whose windingsI could never extricate myself. All I could do was to turn on the waning searchlight of theU-29, and with its aid walk up the temple steps and study the exterior carvings. The shaft oflight entered the door at an upward angle, and I peered in to see if I could glimpse anything,but all in vain. Not even the roof was visible; and though I took a step or two inside aftertesting the floor with a staff, I dared not go farther. Moreover, for the first time in my lifeI experienced the emotion of dread. I began to realise how some of poor Klenze’s moodshad arisen, for as the temple drew me more and more, I feared its aqueous abysses with a blindand mounting terror. Returning to the submarine, I turned off the lights and sat thinking inthe dark. Electricity must now be saved for emergencies.

Saturday the 18th I spent in total darkness, tormented by thoughts and memoriesthat threatened to overcome my German will. Klenze had gone mad and perished before reachingthis sinister remnant of a past unwholesomely remote, and had advised me to go with him. Was,indeed, Fate preserving my reason only to draw me irresistibly to an end more horrible and unthinkablethan any man has dreamed of? Clearly, my nerves were sorely taxed, and I must cast off theseimpressions of weaker men.

I could not sleep Saturday night, and turned on the lights regardless of thefuture. It was annoying that the electricity should not last out the air and provisions. I revivedmy thoughts of euthanasia, and examined my automatic pistol. Toward morning I must have droppedasleep with the lights on, for I awoke in darkness yesterday afternoon to find the batteriesdead. I struck several matches in succession, and desperately regretted the improvidence whichhad caused us long ago to use up the few candles we carried.

After the fading of the last match I dared to waste, I sat very quietly withouta light. As I considered the inevitable end my mind ran over preceding events, and developeda hitherto dormant impression which would have caused a weaker and more superstitious man toshudder. The head of the radiant god in the sculptures on the rock temple is the same asthat carven bit of ivory which the dead sailor brought from the sea and which poor Klenze carriedback into the sea.

I was a little dazed by this coincidence, but did not become terrified. Itis only the inferior thinker who hastens to explain the singular and the complex by the primitiveshort cut of supernaturalism. The coincidence was strange, but I was too sound a reasoner toconnect circumstances which admit of no logical connexion, or to associate in any uncanny fashionthe disastrous events which had led from the Victory affair to my present plight. Feelingthe need of more rest, I took a sedative and secured some more sleep. My nervous condition wasreflected in my dreams, for I seemed to hear the cries of drowning persons, and to see deadfaces pressing against the portholes of the boat. And among the dead faces was the living, mockingface of the youth with the ivory image.

I must be careful how I record my awaking today, for I am unstrung, and muchhallucination is necessarily mixed with fact. Psychologically my case is most interesting, andI regret that it cannot be observed scientifically by a competent German authority. Upon openingmy eyes my first sensation was an overmastering desire to visit the rock temple; a desire whichgrew every instant, yet which I automatically sought to resist through some emotion of fearwhich operated in the reverse direction. Next there came to me the impression of lightamidst the darkness of dead batteries, and I seemed to see a sort of phosphorescent glow inthe water through the porthole which opened toward the temple. This aroused my curiosity, forI knew of no deep-sea organism capable of emitting such luminosity. But before I could investigatethere came a third impression which because of its irrationality caused me to doubt the objectivityof anything my senses might record. It was an aural delusion; a sensation of rhythmic, melodicsound as of some wild yet beautiful chant or choral hymn, coming from the outside through theabsolutely sound-proof hull of the U-29. Convinced of my psychological and nervous abnormality,I lighted some matches and poured a stiff dose of sodium bromide solution, which seemed to calmme to the extent of dispelling the illusion of sound. But the phosphorescence remained, andI had difficulty in repressing a childish impulse to go to the porthole and seek its source.It was horribly realistic, and I could soon distinguish by its aid the familiar objects aroundme, as well as the empty sodium bromide glass of which I had had no former visual impressionin its present location. The last circumstance made me ponder, and I crossed the room and touchedthe glass. It was indeed in the place where I had seemed to see it. Now I knew that the lightwas either real or part of an hallucination so fixed and consistent that I could not hope todispel it, so abandoning all resistance I ascended to the conning tower to look for the luminousagency. Might it not actually be another U-boat, offering possibilities of rescue?

It is well that the reader accept nothing which follows as objective truth,for since the events transcend natural law, they are necessarily the subjective and unreal creationsof my overtaxed mind. When I attained the conning tower I found the sea in general far lessluminous than I had expected. There was no animal or vegetable phosphorescence about, and thecity that sloped down to the river was invisible in blackness. What I did see was not spectacular,not grotesque or terrifying, yet it removed my last vestige of trust in my consciousness. For the door and windows of the undersea temple hewn from the rocky hill were vividly aglowwith a flickering radiance, as from a mighty altar-flame far within.

Later incidents are chaotic. As I stared at the uncannily lighted door andwindows, I became subject to the most extravagant visions—visions so extravagant thatI cannot even relate them. I fancied that I discerned objects in the temple—objects bothstationary and moving—and seemed to hear again the unreal chant that had floated to mewhen first I awaked. And over all rose thoughts and fears which centred in the youth from thesea and the ivory image whose carving was duplicated on the frieze and columns of the templebefore me. I thought of poor Klenze, and wondered where his body rested with the image he hadcarried back into the sea. He had warned me of something, and I had not heeded—but hewas a soft-headed Rhinelander who went mad at troubles a Prussian could bear with ease.

The rest is very simple. My impulse to visit and enter the temple has now becomean inexplicable and imperious command which ultimately cannot be denied. My own German willno longer controls my acts, and volition is henceforward possible only in minor matters. Suchmadness it was which drove Klenze to his death, bareheaded and unprotected in the ocean; butI am a Prussian and a man of sense, and will use to the last what little will I have. When firstI saw that I must go, I prepared my diving suit, helmet, and air regenerator for instant donning;and immediately commenced to write this hurried chronicle in the hope that it may some day reachthe world. I shall seal the manuscript in a bottle and entrust it to the sea as I leave theU-29 forever.

I have no fear, not even from the prophecies of the madman Klenze. What I haveseen cannot be true, and I know that this madness of my own will at most lead only to suffocationwhen my air is gone. The light in the temple is a sheer delusion, and I shall die calmly, likea German, in the black and forgotten depths. This daemoniac laughter which I hear as I writecomes only from my own weakening brain. So I will carefully don my diving suit and walk boldlyup the steps into that primal shrine; that silent secret of unfathomed waters and uncountedyears.
