In London there is a man who screams when the church bells ring. He lives all alone with hisstreaked cat in Gray’s Inn, and people call him harmlessly mad. His room is filled withbooks of the tamest and most puerile kind, and hour after hour he tries to lose himself in theirfeeble pages. All he seeks from life is not to think. For some reason thought is very horribleto him, and anything which stirs the imagination he flees as a plague. He is very thin and greyand wrinkled, but there are those who declare he is not nearly so old as he looks. Fear hasits grisly claws upon him, and a sound will make him start with staring eyes and sweat-beadedforehead. Friends and companions he shuns, for he wishes to answer no questions. Those who onceknew him as scholar and aesthete say it is very pitiful to see him now. He dropped them allyears ago, and no one feels sure whether he left the country or merely sank from sight in somehidden byway. It is a decade now since he moved into Gray’s Inn, and of where he had beenhe would say nothing till the night young Williams bought the Necronomicon.

Williams was a dreamer, and only twenty-three, and when he moved into the ancienthouse he felt a strangeness and a breath of cosmic wind about the grey wizened man in the nextroom. He forced his friendship where old friends dared not force theirs, and marvelled at thefright that sat upon this gaunt, haggard watcher and listener. For that the man always watchedand listened no one could doubt. He watched and listened with his mind more than with his eyesand ears, and strove every moment to drown something in his ceaseless poring over gay, insipidnovels. And when the church bells rang he would stop his ears and scream, and the grey cat thatdwelt with him would howl in unison till the last peal died reverberantly away.

But try as Williams would, he could not make his neighbour speak of anythingprofound or hidden. The old man would not live up to his aspect and manner, but would feigna smile and a light tone and prattle feverishly and frantically of cheerful trifles; his voiceevery moment rising and thickening till at last it would split in a piping and incoherent falsetto.That his learning was deep and thorough, his most trivial remarks made abundantly clear; andWilliams was not surprised to hear that he had been to Harrow and Oxford. Later it developedthat he was none other than Lord Northam, of whose ancient hereditary castle on the Yorkshirecoast so many odd things were told; but when Williams tried to talk of the castle, and of itsreputed Roman origin, he refused to admit that there was anything unusual about it. He eventittered shrilly when the subject of the supposed under crypts, hewn out of the solid crag thatfrowns on the North Sea, was brought up.

So matters went till that night when Williams brought home the infamous Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred. He had known of the dreaded volume since hissixteenth year, when his dawning love of the bizarre had led him to ask queer questions of abent old bookseller in Chandos Street; and he had always wondered why men paled when they spokeof it. The old bookseller had told him that only five copies were known to have survived theshocked edicts of the priests and lawgivers against it and that all of these were locked upwith frightened care by custodians who had ventured to begin a reading of the hateful black-letter.But now, at last, he had not only found an accessible copy but had made it his own at a ludicrouslylow figure. It was at a Jew’s shop in the squalid precincts of Clare Market, where hehad often bought strange things before, and he almost fancied the gnarled old Levite smiledamidst tangles of beard as the great discovery was made. The bulky leather cover with the brassclasp had been so prominently visible, and the price was so absurdly slight.

The one glimpse he had had of the title was enough to send him into transports,and some of the diagrams set in the vague Latin text excited the tensest and most disquietingrecollections in his brain. He felt it was highly necessary to get the ponderous thing homeand begin deciphering it, and bore it out of the shop with such precipitate haste that the oldJew chuckled disturbingly behind him. But when at last it was safe in his room he found thecombination of black-letter and debased idiom too much for his powers as a linguist, and reluctantlycalled on his strange, frightened friend for help with the twisted, mediaeval Latin. Lord Northamwas simpering inanities to his streaked cat, and started violently when the young man entered.Then he saw the volume and shuddered wildly, and fainted altogether when Williams uttered thetitle. It was when he regained his senses that he told his story; told his fantastic figmentof madness in frantic whispers, lest his friend be not quick to burn the accursed book and givewide scattering to its ashes.

***

There must, Lord Northam whispered, have been something wrong at the start;but it would never have come to a head if he had not explored too far. He was the nineteenthBaron of a line whose beginnings went uncomfortably far back into the past—unbelievablyfar, if vague tradition could be heeded, for there were family tales of a descent from pre-Saxontimes, when a certain Cnaeus Gabinius Capito, military tribune in the Third Augustan Legionthen stationed at Lindum in Roman Britain, had been summarily expelled from his command forparticipation in certain rites unconnected with any known religion. Gabinius had, the rumourran, come upon a cliffside cavern where strange folk met together and made the Elder Sign inthe dark; strange folk whom the Britons knew not save in fear, and who were the last to survivefrom a great land in the west that had sunk, leaving only the islands with the raths and circlesand shrines of which Stonehenge was the greatest. There was no certainty, of course, in thelegend that Gabinius had built an impregnable fortress over the forbidden cave and founded aline which Pict and Saxon, Dane and Norman were powerless to obliterate; or in the tacit assumptionthat from this line sprang the bold companion and lieutenant of the Black Prince whom EdwardThird created Baron of Northam. These things were not certain, yet they were often told; andin truth the stonework of Northam Keep did look alarmingly like the masonry of Hadrian’sWall. As a child Lord Northam had had peculiar dreams when sleeping in the older parts of thecastle, and had acquired a constant habit of looking back through his memory for half-amorphousscenes and patterns and impressions which formed no part of his waking experience. He becamea dreamer who found life tame and unsatisfying; a searcher for strange realms and relationshipsonce familiar, yet lying nowhere in the visible regions of earth.

Filled with a feeling that our tangible world is only an atom in a fabric vastand ominous, and that unknown demesnes press on and permeate the sphere of the known at everypoint, Northam in youth and young manhood drained in turn the founts of formal religion andoccult mystery. Nowhere, however, could he find ease and content; and as he grew older the stalenessand limitations of life became more and more maddening to him. During the ’nineties hedabbled in Satanism, and at all times he devoured avidly any doctrine or theory which seemedto promise escape from the close vistas of science and the dully unvarying laws of Nature. Bookslike Ignatius Donnelly’s chimerical account of Atlantis he absorbed with zest, and a dozenobscure precursors of Charles Fort enthralled him with their vagaries. He would travel leaguesto follow up a furtive village tale of abnormal wonder, and once went into the desert of Arabyto seek a Nameless City of faint report, which no man has ever beheld. There rose within himthe tantalising faith that somewhere an easy gate existed, which if one found would admit himfreely to those outer deeps whose echoes rattled so dimly at the back of his memory. It mightbe in the visible world, yet it might be only in his mind and soul. Perhaps he held within hisown half-explored brain that cryptic link which would awaken him to elder and future lives inforgotten dimensions; which would bind him to the stars, and to the infinities and eternitiesbeyond them.
