“There are sacraments of evil as well as of good about us, and we live andmove to my belief in an unknown world, a place where there are caves and shadows and dwellersin twilight. It is possible that man may sometimes return on the track of evolution, and itis my belief that an awful lore is not yet dead.”

—Arthur Machen.

I.

Not many weeks ago, on a street corner in the village of Pascoag, Rhode Island, a tall, heavilybuilt, and wholesome-looking pedestrian furnished much speculation by a singular lapse of behaviour.He had, it appears, been descending the hill by the road from Chepachet; and encountering thecompact section, had turned to his left into the main thoroughfare where several modest businessblocks convey a touch of the urban. At this point, without visible provocation, he committedhis astonishing lapse; staring queerly for a second at the tallest of the buildings before him,and then, with a series of terrified, hysterical shrieks, breaking into a frantic run whichended in a stumble and fall at the next crossing. Picked up and dusted off by ready hands, hewas found to be conscious, organically unhurt, and evidently cured of his sudden nervous attack.He muttered some shamefaced explanations involving a strain he had undergone, and with downcastglance turned back up the Chepachet road, trudging out of sight without once looking behindhim. It was a strange incident to befall so large, robust, normal-featured, and capable-lookinga man, and the strangeness was not lessened by the remarks of a bystander who had recognisedhim as the boarder of a well-known dairyman on the outskirts of Chepachet.

He was, it developed, a New York police detective named Thomas F. Malone, nowon a long leave of absence under medical treatment after some disproportionately arduous workon a gruesome local case which accident had made dramatic. There had been a collapse of severalold brick buildings during a raid in which he had shared, and something about the wholesaleloss of life, both of prisoners and of his companions, had peculiarly appalled him. As a result,he had acquired an acute and anomalous horror of any buildings even remotely suggesting theones which had fallen in, so that in the end mental specialists forbade him the sight of suchthings for an indefinite period. A police surgeon with relatives in Chepachet had put forwardthat quaint hamlet of wooden colonial houses as an ideal spot for the psychological convalescence;and thither the sufferer had gone, promising never to venture among the brick-lined streetsof larger villages till duly advised by the Woonsocket specialist with whom he was put in touch.This walk to Pascoag for magazines had been a mistake, and the patient had paid in fright, bruises,and humiliation for his disobedience.

So much the gossips of Chepachet and Pascoag knew; and so much, also, the mostlearned specialists believed. But Malone had at first told the specialists much more, ceasingonly when he saw that utter incredulity was his portion. Thereafter he held his peace, protestingnot at all when it was generally agreed that the collapse of certain squalid brick houses inthe Red Hook section of Brooklyn, and the consequent death of many brave officers, had unseatedhis nervous equilibrium. He had worked too hard, all said, in trying to clean up those nestsof disorder and violence; certain features were shocking enough, in all conscience, and theunexpected tragedy was the last straw. This was a simple explanation which everyone could understand,and because Malone was not a simple person he perceived that he had better let it suffice. Tohint to unimaginative people of a horror beyond all human conception—a horror of housesand blocks and cities leprous and cancerous with evil dragged from elder worlds—wouldbe merely to invite a padded cell instead of restful rustication, and Malone was a man of sensedespite his mysticism. He had the Celt’s far vision of weird and hidden things, but thelogician’s quick eye for the outwardly unconvincing; an amalgam which had led him farafield in the forty-two years of his life, and set him in strange places for a Dublin Universityman born in a Georgian villa near Phoenix Park.

And now, as he reviewed the things he had seen and felt and apprehended, Malonewas content to keep unshared the secret of what could reduce a dauntless fighter to a quiveringneurotic; what could make old brick slums and seas of dark, subtle faces a thing of nightmareand eldritch portent. It would not be the first time his sensations had been forced to bideuninterpreted—for was not his very act of plunging into the polyglot abyss of New York’sunderworld a freak beyond sensible explanation? What could he tell the prosaic of the antiquewitcheries and grotesque marvels discernible to sensitive eyes amidst the poison cauldron whereall the varied dregs of unwholesome ages mix their venom and perpetuate their obscene terrors?He had seen the hellish green flame of secret wonder in this blatant, evasive welter of outwardgreed and inward blasphemy, and had smiled gently when all the New-Yorkers he knew scoffed athis experiment in police work. They had been very witty and cynical, deriding his fantasticpursuit of unknowable mysteries and assuring him that in these days New York held nothing butcheapness and vulgarity. One of them had wagered him a heavy sum that he could not—despitemany poignant things to his credit in the Dublin Review—even write a truly interestingstory of New York low life; and now, looking back, he perceived that cosmic irony had justifiedthe prophet’s words while secretly confuting their flippant meaning. The horror, as glimpsedat last, could not make a story—for like the book cited by Poe’s German authority,“es lässt sich nicht lesen—it does not permit itself to be read.”

II.

To Malone the sense of latent mystery in existence was always present. In youth he had feltthe hidden beauty and ecstasy of things, and had been a poet; but poverty and sorrow and exilehad turned his gaze in darker directions, and he had thrilled at the imputations of evil inthe world around. Daily life had for him come to be a phantasmagoria of macabre shadow-studies;now glittering and leering with concealed rottenness as in Beardsley’s best manner, nowhinting terrors behind the commonest shapes and objects as in the subtler and less obvious workof Gustave Doré. He would often regard it as merciful that most persons of high intelligencejeer at the inmost mysteries; for, he argued, if superior minds were ever placed in fullestcontact with the secrets preserved by ancient and lowly cults, the resultant abnormalities wouldsoon not only wreck the world, but threaten the very integrity of the universe. All this reflectionwas no doubt morbid, but keen logic and a deep sense of humour ably offset it. Malone was satisfiedto let his notions remain as half-spied and forbidden visions to be lightly played with; andhysteria came only when duty flung him into a hell of revelation too sudden and insidious toescape.

He had for some time been detailed to the Butler Street station in Brooklynwhen the Red Hook matter came to his notice. Red Hook is a maze of hybrid squalor near the ancientwaterfront opposite Governor’s Island, with dirty highways climbing the hill from thewharves to that higher ground where the decayed lengths of Clinton and Court Streets lead offtoward the Borough Hall. Its houses are mostly of brick, dating from the first quarter to themiddle of the nineteenth century, and some of the obscurer alleys and byways have that alluringantique flavour which conventional reading leads us to call “Dickensian”. The populationis a hopeless tangle and enigma; Syrian, Spanish, Italian, and negro elements impinging uponone another, and fragments of Scandinavian and American belts lying not far distant. It is ababel of sound and filth, and sends out strange cries to answer the lapping of oily waves atits grimy piers and the monstrous organ litanies of the harbour whistles. Here long ago a brighterpicture dwelt, with clear-eyed mariners on the lower streets and homes of taste and substancewhere the larger houses line the hill. One can trace the relics of this former happiness inthe trim shapes of the buildings, the occasional graceful churches, and the evidences of originalart and background in bits of detail here and there—a worn flight of steps, a battereddoorway, a wormy pair of decorative columns or pilasters, or a fragment of once green spacewith bent and rusted iron railing. The houses are generally in solid blocks, and now and thena many-windowed cupola arises to tell of days when the households of captains and ship-ownerswatched the sea.

From this tangle of material and spiritual putrescence the blasphemies of anhundred dialects assail the sky. Hordes of prowlers reel shouting and singing along the lanesand thoroughfares, occasional furtive hands suddenly extinguish lights and pull down curtains,and swarthy, sin-pitted faces disappear from windows when visitors pick their way through. Policemendespair of order or reform, and seek rather to erect barriers protecting the outside world fromthe contagion. The clang of the patrol is answered by a kind of spectral silence, and such prisonersas are taken are never communicative. Visible offences are as varied as the local dialects,and run the gamut from the smuggling of rum and prohibited aliens through diverse stages oflawlessness and obscure vice to murder and mutilation in their most abhorrent guises. That thesevisible affairs are not more frequent is not to the neighbourhood’s credit, unless thepower of concealment be an art demanding credit. More people enter Red Hook than leave it—orat least, than leave it by the landward side—and those who are not loquacious are thelikeliest to leave.

Malone found in this state of things a faint stench of secrets more terrible thanany of the sins denounced by citizens and bemoaned by priests and philanthropists. He wasconscious, as one who united imagination with scientific knowledge, that modern people underlawless conditions tend uncannily to repeat the darkest instinctive patterns of primitive half-apesavagery in their daily life and ritual observances; and he had often viewed with ananthropologist’s shudder the chanting, cursing processions of blear-eyed and pockmarked youngmen which wound their way along in the dark small hours of morning. One saw groups of these youthsincessantly; sometimes in leering vigils on street corners, sometimes in doorways playing eerily oncheap instruments of music, sometimes in stupefied dozes or indecent dialogues around cafeteriatables near Borough Hall, and sometimes in whispering converse around dingy taxicabs drawn up atthe high stoops of crumbling and closely shuttered old houses. They chilled and fascinated him morethan he dared confess to his associates on the force, for he seemed to see in them some monstrousthread of secret continuity; some fiendish, cryptical, and ancient pattern utterly beyond andbelow the sordid mass of facts and habits and haunts listed with such conscientious technicalcare by the police. They must be, he felt inwardly, the heirs of some shocking and primordialtradition; the sharers of debased and broken scraps from cults and ceremonies older than mankind.Their coherence and definiteness suggested it, and it shewed in the singular suspicion of orderwhich lurked beneath their squalid disorder. He had not read in vain such treatises as MissMurray’s Witch-Cult in Western Europe; and knew that up to recent years there hadcertainly survived among peasants and furtive folk a frightful and clandestine system of assembliesand orgies descended from dark religions antedating the Aryan world, and appearing in popularlegends as Black Masses and Witches’ Sabbaths. That these hellish vestiges of oldTuranian-Asiatic magic and fertility-cults were even now wholly dead he could not for a momentsuppose, and he frequently wondered how much older and how much blacker than the very worst of themuttered tales some of them might really be.

III.

It was the case of Robert Suydam which took Malone to the heart of things in Red Hook. Suydamwas a lettered recluse of ancient Dutch family, possessed originally of barely independent means,and inhabiting the spacious but ill-preserved mansion which his grandfather had built in Flatbushwhen that village was little more than a pleasant group of colonial cottages surrounding thesteepled and ivy-clad Reformed Church with its iron-railed yard of Netherlandish gravestones.In his lonely house, set back from Martense Street amidst a yard of venerable trees, Suydamhad read and brooded for some six decades except for a period a generation before, when he hadsailed for the old world and remained there out of sight for eight years. He could afford noservants, and would admit but few visitors to his absolute solitude; eschewing close friendshipsand receiving his rare acquaintances in one of the three ground-floor rooms which he kept inorder—a vast, high-ceiled library whose walls were solidly packed with tattered booksof ponderous, archaic, and vaguely repellent aspect. The growth of the town and its final absorptionin the Brooklyn district had meant nothing to Suydam, and he had come to mean less and lessto the town. Elderly people still pointed him out on the streets, but to most of the recentpopulation he was merely a queer, corpulent old fellow whose unkempt white hair, stubbly beard,shiny black clothes, and gold-headed cane earned him an amused glance and nothing more. Malonedid not know him by sight till duty called him to the case, but had heard of him indirectlyas a really profound authority on mediaeval superstition, and had once idly meant to look upan out-of-print pamphlet of his on the Kabbalah and the Faustus legend, which a friend had quotedfrom memory.

Suydam became a “case” when his distant and only relatives soughtcourt pronouncements on his sanity. Their action seemed sudden to the outside world, but wasreally undertaken only after prolonged observation and sorrowful debate. It was based on certainodd changes in his speech and habits; wild references to impending wonders, and unaccountablehauntings of disreputable Brooklyn neighbourhoods. He had been growing shabbier and shabbierwith the years, and now prowled about like a veritable mendicant; seen occasionally by humiliatedfriends in subway stations, or loitering on the benches around Borough Hall in conversationwith groups of swarthy, evil-looking strangers. When he spoke it was to babble of unlimitedpowers almost within his grasp, and to repeat with knowing leers such mystical words or namesas “Sephiroth”, “Ashmodai”, and “Samaël”. The courtaction revealed that he was using up his income and wasting his principal in the purchase ofcurious tomes imported from London and Paris, and in the maintenance of a squalid basement flatin the Red Hook district where he spent nearly every night, receiving odd delegations of mixedrowdies and foreigners, and apparently conducting some kind of ceremonial service behind thegreen blinds of secretive windows. Detectives assigned to follow him reported strange criesand chants and prancing of feet filtering out from these nocturnal rites, and shuddered at theirpeculiar ecstasy and abandon despite the commonness of weird orgies in that sodden section.When, however, the matter came to a hearing, Suydam managed to preserve his liberty. Beforethe judge his manner grew urbane and reasonable, and he freely admitted the queerness of demeanourand extravagant cast of language into which he had fallen through excessive devotion to studyand research. He was, he said, engaged in the investigation of certain details of European traditionwhich required the closest contact with foreign groups and their songs and folk dances. Thenotion that any low secret society was preying upon him, as hinted by his relatives, was obviouslyabsurd; and shewed how sadly limited was their understanding of him and his work. Triumphingwith his calm explanations, he was suffered to depart unhindered; and the paid detectives ofthe Suydams, Corlears, and Van Brunts were withdrawn in resigned disgust.

It was here that an alliance of Federal inspectors and police, Malone withthem, entered the case. The law had watched the Suydam action with interest, and had in manyinstances been called upon to aid the private detectives. In this work it developed that Suydam’snew associates were among the blackest and most vicious criminals of Red Hook’s deviouslanes, and that at least a third of them were known and repeated offenders in the matter ofthievery, disorder, and the importation of illegal immigrants. Indeed, it would not have beentoo much to say that the old scholar’s particular circle coincided almost perfectly withthe worst of the organised cliques which smuggled ashore certain nameless and unclassified Asiandregs wisely turned back by Ellis Island. In the teeming rookeries of Parker Place—sincerenamed—where Suydam had his basement flat, there had grown up a very unusual colony ofunclassified slant-eyed folk who used the Arabic alphabet but were eloquently repudiated bythe great mass of Syrians in and around Atlantic Avenue. They could all have been deported forlack of credentials, but legalism is slow-moving, and one does not disturb Red Hook unless publicityforces one to.

These creatures attended a tumbledown stone church, used Wednesdays as a dance-hall,which reared its Gothic buttresses near the vilest part of the waterfront. It was nominallyCatholic; but priests throughout Brooklyn denied the place all standing and authenticity, andpolicemen agreed with them when they listened to the noises it emitted at night. Malone usedto fancy he heard terrible cracked bass notes from a hidden organ far underground when the churchstood empty and unlighted, whilst all observers dreaded the shrieking and drumming which accompaniedthe visible services. Suydam, when questioned, said he thought the ritual was some remnant ofNestorian Christianity tinctured with the Shamanism of Thibet. Most of the people, he conjectured,were of Mongoloid stock, originating somewhere in or near Kurdistan—and Malone could nothelp recalling that Kurdistan is the land of the Yezidis, last survivors of the Persian devil-worshippers.However this may have been, the stir of the Suydam investigation made it certain that theseunauthorised newcomers were flooding Red Hook in increasing numbers; entering through some marineconspiracy unreached by revenue officers and harbour police, overrunning Parker Place and rapidlyspreading up the hill, and welcomed with curious fraternalism by the other assorted denizensof the region. Their squat figures and characteristic squinting physiognomies, grotesquely combinedwith flashy American clothing, appeared more and more numerously among the loafers and nomadgangsters of the Borough Hall section; till at length it was deemed necessary to compute theirnumbers, ascertain their sources and occupations, and find if possible a way to round them upand deliver them to the proper immigration authorities. To this task Malone was assigned byagreement of Federal and city forces, and as he commenced his canvass of Red Hook he felt poisedupon the brink of nameless terrors, with the shabby, unkempt figure of Robert Suydam as arch-fiendand adversary.

IV.

Police methods are varied and ingenious. Malone, through unostentatious rambles, carefully casualconversations, well-timed offers of hip-pocket liquor, and judicious dialogues with frightenedprisoners, learned many isolated facts about the movement whose aspect had become so menacing.The newcomers were indeed Kurds, but of a dialect obscure and puzzling to exact philology. Suchof them as worked lived mostly as dock-hands and unlicenced pedlars, though frequently servingin Greek restaurants and tending corner news stands. Most of them, however, had no visible meansof support; and were obviously connected with underworld pursuits, of which smuggling and “bootlegging”were the least indescribable. They had come in steamships, apparently tramp freighters, andhad been unloaded by stealth on moonless nights in rowboats which stole under a certain wharfand followed a hidden canal to a secret subterranean pool beneath a house. This wharf, canal,and house Malone could not locate, for the memories of his informants were exceedingly confused,while their speech was to a great extent beyond even the ablest interpreters; nor could he gainany real data on the reasons for their systematic importation. They were reticent about theexact spot from which they had come, and were never sufficiently off guard to reveal the agencieswhich had sought them out and directed their course. Indeed, they developed something like acutefright when asked the reasons for their presence. Gangsters of other breeds were equally taciturn,and the most that could be gathered was that some god or great priesthood had promised themunheard-of powers and supernatural glories and rulerships in a strange land.

The attendance of both newcomers and old gangsters at Suydam’s closelyguarded nocturnal meetings was very regular, and the police soon learned that the erstwhilerecluse had leased additional flats to accommodate such guests as knew his password; at lastoccupying three entire houses and permanently harbouring many of his queer companions. He spentbut little time now at his Flatbush home, apparently going and coming only to obtain and returnbooks; and his face and manner had attained an appalling pitch of wildness. Malone twice interviewedhim, but was each time brusquely repulsed. He knew nothing, he said, of any mysterious plotsor movements; and had no idea how the Kurds could have entered or what they wanted. His businesswas to study undisturbed the folklore of all the immigrants of the district; a business withwhich policemen had no legitimate concern. Malone mentioned his admiration for Suydam’sold brochure on the Kabbalah and other myths, but the old man’s softening was only momentary.He sensed an intrusion, and rebuffed his visitor in no uncertain way; till Malone withdrew disgusted,and turned to other channels of information.

What Malone would have unearthed could he have worked continuously on the case,we shall never know. As it was, a stupid conflict between city and Federal authority suspendedthe investigations for several months, during which the detective was busy with other assignments.But at no time did he lose interest, or fail to stand amazed at what began to happen to RobertSuydam. Just at the time when a wave of kidnappings and disappearances spread its excitementover New York, the unkempt scholar embarked upon a metamorphosis as startling as it was absurd.One day he was seen near Borough Hall with clean-shaved face, well-trimmed hair, and tastefullyimmaculate attire, and on every day thereafter some obscure improvement was noticed in him.He maintained his new fastidiousness without interruption, added to it an unwonted sparkle ofeye and crispness of speech, and began little by little to shed the corpulence which had solong deformed him. Now frequently taken for less than his age, he acquired an elasticity ofstep and buoyancy of demeanour to match the new tradition, and shewed a curious darkening ofthe hair which somehow did not suggest dye. As the months passed, he commenced to dress lessand less conservatively, and finally astonished his new friends by renovating and redecoratinghis Flatbush mansion, which he threw open in a series of receptions, summoning all the acquaintanceshe could remember, and extending a special welcome to the fully forgiven relatives who had solately sought his restraint. Some attended through curiosity, others through duty; but all weresuddenly charmed by the dawning grace and urbanity of the former hermit. He had, he asserted,accomplished most of his allotted work; and having just inherited some property from a half-forgottenEuropean friend, was about to spend his remaining years in a brighter second youth which ease,care, and diet had made possible to him. Less and less was he seen at Red Hook, and more andmore did he move in the society to which he was born. Policemen noted a tendency of the gangstersto congregate at the old stone church and dance-hall instead of at the basement flat in ParkerPlace, though the latter and its recent annexes still overflowed with noxious life.

Then two incidents occurred—wide enough apart, but both of intense interestin the case as Malone envisaged it. One was a quiet announcement in the Eagle of RobertSuydam’s engagement to Miss Cornelia Gerritsen of Bayside, a young woman of excellentposition, and distantly related to the elderly bridegroom-elect; whilst the other was a raidon the dance-hall church by city police, after a report that the face of a kidnapped child hadbeen seen for a second at one of the basement windows. Malone had participated in this raid,and studied the place with much care when inside. Nothing was found—in fact, the buildingwas entirely deserted when visited—but the sensitive Celt was vaguely disturbed by manythings about the interior. There were crudely painted panels he did not like—panels whichdepicted sacred faces with peculiarly worldly and sardonic expressions, and which occasionallytook liberties that even a layman’s sense of decorum could scarcely countenance. Then,too, he did not relish the Greek inscription on the wall above the pulpit; an ancient incantationwhich he had once stumbled upon in Dublin college days, and which read, literally translated,

“O friend and companion of night, thou who rejoicest in the baying ofdogs and spilt blood, who wanderest in the midst of shades among the tombs, who longest forblood and bringest terror to mortals, Gorgo, Mormo, thousand-faced moon, look favourably onour sacrifices!”When he read this he shuddered, and thought vaguely of the cracked bass organ notes he fanciedhe had heard beneath the church on certain nights. He shuddered again at the rust around therim of a metal basin which stood on the altar, and paused nervously when his nostrils seemedto detect a curious and ghastly stench from somewhere in the neighbourhood. That organ memoryhaunted him, and he explored the basement with particular assiduity before he left. The placewas very hateful to him; yet after all, were the blasphemous panels and inscriptions more thanmere crudities perpetrated by the ignorant?

By the time of Suydam’s wedding the kidnapping epidemic had become apopular newspaper scandal. Most of the victims were young children of the lowest classes, butthe increasing number of disappearances had worked up a sentiment of the strongest fury. Journalsclamoured for action from the police, and once more the Butler Street station sent its men overRed Hook for clues, discoveries, and criminals. Malone was glad to be on the trail again, andtook pride in a raid on one of Suydam’s Parker Place houses. There, indeed, no stolenchild was found, despite the tales of screams and the red sash picked up in the areaway; butthe paintings and rough inscriptions on the peeling walls of most of the rooms, and the primitivechemical laboratory in the attic, all helped to convince the detective that he was on the trackof something tremendous. The paintings were appalling—hideous monsters of every shapeand size, and parodies on human outlines which cannot be described. The writing was in red,and varied from Arabic to Greek, Roman, and Hebrew letters. Malone could not read much of it,but what he did decipher was portentous and cabbalistic enough. One frequently repeated mottowas in a sort of Hebraised Hellenistic Greek, and suggested the most terrible daemon-evocationsof the Alexandrian decadence:

“HEL • HELOYM • SOTHER • EMMANVEL • SABAOTH • AGLA• TETRAGRAMMATON • AGYROS • OTHEOS • ISCHYROS • ATHANATOS • IEHOVA• VA • ADONAI • SADAY • HOMOVSION • MESSIAS • ESCHEREHEYE.”Circles and pentagrams loomed on every hand, and told indubitably of the strange beliefs andaspirations of those who dwelt so squalidly here. In the cellar, however, the strangest thingwas found—a pile of genuine gold ingots covered carelessly with a piece of burlap, andbearing upon their shining surfaces the same weird hieroglyphics which also adorned the walls.During the raid the police encountered only a passive resistance from the squinting Orientalsthat swarmed from every door. Finding nothing relevant, they had to leave all as it was; butthe precinct captain wrote Suydam a note advising him to look closely to the character of histenants and protégés in view of the growing public clamour.

V.

Then came the June wedding and the great sensation. Flatbush was gay for the hour about highnoon, and pennanted motors thronged the streets near the old Dutch church where an awning stretchedfrom door to highway. No local event ever surpassed the Suydam-Gerritsen nuptials in tone andscale, and the party which escorted bride and groom to the Cunard Pier was, if not exactly thesmartest, at least a solid page from the Social Register. At five o’clock adieux werewaved, and the ponderous liner edged away from the long pier, slowly turned its nose seaward,discarded its tug, and headed for the widening water spaces that led to old world wonders. Bynight the outer harbour was cleared, and late passengers watched the stars twinkling above anunpolluted ocean.

Whether the tramp steamer or the scream was first to gain attention, no onecan say. Probably they were simultaneous, but it is of no use to calculate. The scream camefrom the Suydam stateroom, and the sailor who broke down the door could perhaps have told frightfulthings if he had not forthwith gone completely mad—as it is, he shrieked more loudly thanthe first victims, and thereafter ran simpering about the vessel till caught and put in irons.The ship’s doctor who entered the stateroom and turned on the lights a moment later didnot go mad, but told nobody what he saw till afterward, when he corresponded with Malone inChepachet. It was murder—strangulation—but one need not say that the claw-mark onMrs. Suydam’s throat could not have come from her husband’s or any other human hand,or that upon the white wall there flickered for an instant in hateful red a legend which, latercopied from memory, seems to have been nothing less than the fearsome Chaldee letters of theword “LILITH”. One need not mention these things because they vanished so quickly—asfor Suydam, one could at least bar others from the room until one knew what to think oneself.The doctor has distinctly assured Malone that he did not see IT. The open porthole, justbefore he turned on the lights, was clouded for a second with a certain phosphorescence, andfor a moment there seemed to echo in the night outside the suggestion of a faint and hellishtittering; but no real outline met the eye. As proof, the doctor points to his continued sanity.

Then the tramp steamer claimed all attention. A boat put off, and a horde ofswart, insolent ruffians in officers’ dress swarmed aboard the temporarily halted Cunarder.They wanted Suydam or his body—they had known of his trip, and for certain reasons weresure he would die. The captain’s deck was almost a pandemonium; for at the instant, betweenthe doctor’s report from the stateroom and the demands of the men from the tramp, noteven the wisest and gravest seaman could think what to do. Suddenly the leader of the visitingmariners, an Arab with a hatefully negroid mouth, pulled forth a dirty, crumpled paper and handedit to the captain. It was signed by Robert Suydam, and bore the following odd message:

“In case of sudden or unexplained accident or death on my part, pleasedeliver me or my body unquestioningly into the hands of the bearer and his associates. Everything,for me, and perhaps for you, depends on absolute compliance. Explanations can come later—donot fail me now.

ROBERT SUYDAM.”Captain and doctor looked at each other, and the latter whispered somethingto the former. Finally they nodded rather helplessly and led the way to the Suydam stateroom.The doctor directed the captain’s glance away as he unlocked the door and admitted thestrange seamen, nor did he breathe easily till they filed out with their burden after an unaccountablylong period of preparation. It was wrapped in bedding from the berths, and the doctor was gladthat the outlines were not very revealing. Somehow the men got the thing over the side and awayto their tramp steamer without uncovering it. The Cunarder started again, and the doctor anda ship’s undertaker sought out the Suydam stateroom to perform what last services theycould. Once more the physician was forced to reticence and even to mendacity, for a hellishthing had happened. When the undertaker asked him why he had drained off all of Mrs. Suydam’sblood, he neglected to affirm that he had not done so; nor did he point to the vacant bottle-spaceson the rack, or to the odour in the sink which shewed the hasty disposition of the bottles’original contents. The pockets of those men—if men they were—had bulged damnablywhen they left the ship. Two hours later, and the world knew by radio all that it ought to knowof the horrible affair.

VI.

That same June evening, without having heard a word from the sea, Malone was desperately busyamong the alleys of Red Hook. A sudden stir seemed to permeate the place, and as if apprisedby “grapevine telegraph” of something singular, the denizens clustered expectantlyaround the dance-hall church and the houses in Parker Place. Three children had just disappeared—blue-eyedNorwegians from the streets toward Gowanus—and there were rumours of a mob forming amongthe sturdy Vikings of that section. Malone had for weeks been urging his colleagues to attempta general cleanup; and at last, moved by conditions more obvious to their common sense thanthe conjectures of a Dublin dreamer, they had agreed upon a final stroke. The unrest and menaceof this evening had been the deciding factor, and just about midnight a raiding party recruitedfrom three stations descended upon Parker Place and its environs. Doors were battered in, stragglersarrested, and candlelighted rooms forced to disgorge unbelievable throngs of mixed foreignersin figured robes, mitres, and other inexplicable devices. Much was lost in the melee, for objectswere thrown hastily down unexpected shafts, and betraying odours deadened by the sudden kindlingof pungent incense. But spattered blood was everywhere, and Malone shuddered whenever he sawa brazier or altar from which the smoke was still rising.

He wanted to be in several places at once, and decided on Suydam’s basementflat only after a messenger had reported the complete emptiness of the dilapidated dance-hallchurch. The flat, he thought, must hold some clue to a cult of which the occult scholar hadso obviously become the centre and leader; and it was with real expectancy that he ransackedthe musty rooms, noted their vaguely charnel odour, and examined the curious books, instruments,gold ingots, and glass-stoppered bottles scattered carelessly here and there. Once a lean, black-and-whitecat edged between his feet and tripped him, overturning at the same time a beaker half fullof a red liquid. The shock was severe, and to this day Malone is not certain of what he saw;but in dreams he still pictures that cat as it scuttled away with certain monstrous alterationsand peculiarities. Then came the locked cellar door, and the search for something to break itdown. A heavy stool stood near, and its tough seat was more than enough for the antique panels.A crack formed and enlarged, and the whole door gave way—but from the other side;whence poured a howling tumult of ice-cold wind with all the stenches of the bottomless pit,and whence reached a sucking force not of earth or heaven, which, coiling sentiently about theparalysed detective, dragged him through the aperture and down unmeasured spaces filled withwhispers and wails, and gusts of mocking laughter.

Of course it was a dream. All the specialists have told him so, and he hasnothing to prove the contrary. Indeed, he would rather have it thus; for then the sight of oldbrick slums and dark foreign faces would not eat so deeply into his soul. But at the time itwas all horribly real, and nothing can ever efface the memory of those nighted crypts, thosetitan arcades, and those half-formed shapes of hell that strode gigantically in silence holdinghalf-eaten things whose still surviving portions screamed for mercy or laughed with madness.Odours of incense and corruption joined in sickening concert, and the black air was alive withthe cloudy, semi-visible bulk of shapeless elemental things with eyes. Somewhere dark stickywater was lapping at onyx piers, and once the shivery tinkle of raucous little bells pealedout to greet the insane titter of a naked phosphorescent thing which swam into sight, scrambledashore, and climbed up to squat leeringly on a carved golden pedestal in the background.

Avenues of limitless night seemed to radiate in every direction, till one mightfancy that here lay the root of a contagion destined to sicken and swallow cities, and engulfnations in the foetor of hybrid pestilence. Here cosmic sin had entered, and festered by unhallowedrites had commenced the grinning march of death that was to rot us all to fungous abnormalitiestoo hideous for the grave’s holding. Satan here held his Babylonish court, and in theblood of stainless childhood the leprous limbs of phosphorescent Lilith were laved. Incubi andsuccubae howled praise to Hecate, and headless moon-calves bleated to the Magna Mater. Goatsleaped to the sound of thin accursed flutes, and aegipans chased endlessly after misshapen faunsover rocks twisted like swollen toads. Moloch and Ashtaroth were not absent; for in this quintessenceof all damnation the bounds of consciousness were let down, and man’s fancy lay open tovistas of every realm of horror and every forbidden dimension that evil had power to mould.The world and Nature were helpless against such assaults from unsealed wells of night, nor couldany sign or prayer check the Walpurgis-riot of horror which had come when a sage with the hatefulkey had stumbled on a horde with the locked and brimming coffer of transmitted daemon-lore.

Suddenly a ray of physical light shot through these phantasms, and Malone heardthe sound of oars amidst the blasphemies of things that should be dead. A boat with a lanternin its prow darted into sight, made fast to an iron ring in the slimy stone pier, and vomitedforth several dark men bearing a long burden swathed in bedding. They took it to the naked phosphorescentthing on the carved golden pedestal, and the thing tittered and pawed at the bedding. Then theyunswathed it, and propped upright before the pedestal the gangrenous corpse of a corpulent oldman with stubbly beard and unkempt white hair. The phosphorescent thing tittered again, andthe men produced bottles from their pockets and anointed its feet with red, whilst they afterwardgave the bottles to the thing to drink from.

All at once, from an arcaded avenue leading endlessly away, there came thedaemoniac rattle and wheeze of a blasphemous organ, choking and rumbling out the mockeries ofhell in a cracked, sardonic bass. In an instant every moving entity was electrified; and formingat once into a ceremonial procession, the nightmare horde slithered away in quest of the sound—goat,satyr, and aegipan, incubus, succuba, and lemur, twisted toad and shapeless elemental, dog-facedhowler and silent strutter in darkness—all led by the abominable naked phosphorescentthing that had squatted on the carved golden throne, and that now strode insolently bearingin its arms the glassy-eyed corpse of the corpulent old man. The strange dark men danced inthe rear, and the whole column skipped and leaped with Dionysiac fury. Malone staggered afterthem a few steps, delirious and hazy, and doubtful of his place in this or in any world. Thenhe turned, faltered, and sank down on the cold damp stone, gasping and shivering as the daemonorgan croaked on, and the howling and drumming and tinkling of the mad procession grew fainterand fainter.

Vaguely he was conscious of chanted horrors and shocking croakings afar off.Now and then a wail or whine of ceremonial devotion would float to him through the black arcade,whilst eventually there rose the dreadful Greek incantation whose text he had read above thepulpit of that dance-hall church.

“O friend and companion of night, thou who rejoicest in the baying ofdogs (here a hideous howl burst forth) and spilt blood (here nameless sounds viedwith morbid shriekings), who wanderest in the midst of shades among the tombs (here awhistling sigh occurred), who longest for blood and bringest terror to mortals (short,sharp cries from myriad throats), Gorgo (repeated as response), Mormo (repeatedwith ecstasy), thousand-faced moon (sighs and flute notes), look favourably on oursacrifices!”

As the chant closed, a general shout went up, and hissing sounds nearly drownedthe croaking of the cracked bass organ. Then a gasp as from many throats, and a babel of barkedand bleated words—“Lilith, Great Lilith, behold the Bridegroom!” More cries,a clamour of rioting, and the sharp, clicking footfalls of a running figure. The footfalls approached,and Malone raised himself to his elbow to look.

The luminosity of the crypt, lately diminished, had now slightly increased;and in that devil-light there appeared the fleeing form of that which should not flee or feelor breathe—the glassy-eyed, gangrenous corpse of the corpulent old man, now needing nosupport, but animated by some infernal sorcery of the rite just closed. After it raced the naked,tittering, phosphorescent thing that belonged on the carven pedestal, and still farther behindpanted the dark men, and all the dread crew of sentient loathsomenesses. The corpse was gainingon its pursuers, and seemed bent on a definite object, straining with every rotting muscle towardthe carved golden pedestal, whose necromantic importance was evidently so great. Another momentand it had reached its goal, whilst the trailing throng laboured on with more frantic speed.But they were too late, for in one final spurt of strength which ripped tendon from tendon andsent its noisome bulk floundering to the floor in a state of jellyish dissolution, the staringcorpse which had been Robert Suydam achieved its object and its triumph. The push had been tremendous,but the force had held out; and as the pusher collapsed to a muddy blotch of corruption thepedestal he had pushed tottered, tipped, and finally careened from its onyx base into the thickwaters below, sending up a parting gleam of carven gold as it sank heavily to undreamable gulfsof lower Tartarus. In that instant, too, the whole scene of horror faded to nothingness beforeMalone’s eyes; and he fainted amidst a thunderous crash which seemed to blot out all theevil universe.

VII.

Malone’s dream, experienced in full before he knew of Suydam’s death and transferat sea, was curiously supplemented by some odd realities of the case; though that is no reasonwhy anyone should believe it. The three old houses in Parker Place, doubtless long rotten withdecay in its most insidious form, collapsed without visible cause while half the raiders andmost of the prisoners were inside; and of both the greater number were instantly killed. Onlyin the basements and cellars was there much saving of life, and Malone was lucky to have beendeep below the house of Robert Suydam. For he really was there, as no one is disposed to deny.They found him unconscious by the edge of a night-black pool, with a grotesquely horrible jumbleof decay and bone, identifiable through dental work as the body of Suydam, a few feet away.The case was plain, for it was hither that the smugglers’ underground canal led; and themen who took Suydam from the ship had brought him home. They themselves were never found, orat least never identified; and the ship’s doctor is not yet satisfied with the simplecertitudes of the police.

Suydam was evidently a leader in extensive man-smuggling operations, for thecanal to his house was but one of several subterranean channels and tunnels in the neighbourhood.There was a tunnel from this house to a crypt beneath the dance-hall church; a crypt accessiblefrom the church only through a narrow secret passage in the north wall, and in whose chamberssome singular and terrible things were discovered. The croaking organ was there, as well asa vast arched chapel with wooden benches and a strangely figured altar. The walls were linedwith small cells, in seventeen of which—hideous to relate—solitary prisoners ina state of complete idiocy were found chained, including four mothers with infants of disturbinglystrange appearance. These infants died soon after exposure to the light; a circumstance whichthe doctors thought rather merciful. Nobody but Malone, among those who inspected them, rememberedthe sombre question of old Delrio: “An sint unquam daemones incubi et succubae, etan ex tali congressu proles nasci queat?”

Before the canals were filled up they were thoroughly dredged, and yieldedforth a sensational array of sawed and split bones of all sizes. The kidnapping epidemic, veryclearly, had been traced home; though only two of the surviving prisoners could by any legalthread be connected with it. These men are now in prison, since they failed of conviction asaccessories in the actual murders. The carved golden pedestal or throne so often mentioned byMalone as of primary occult importance was never brought to light, though at one place underthe Suydam house the canal was observed to sink into a well too deep for dredging. It was chokedup at the mouth and cemented over when the cellars of the new houses were made, but Malone oftenspeculates on what lies beneath. The police, satisfied that they had shattered a dangerous gangof maniacs and man-smugglers, turned over to the Federal authorities the unconvicted Kurds,who before their deportation were conclusively found to belong to the Yezidi clan of devil-worshippers.The tramp ship and its crew remain an elusive mystery, though cynical detectives are once moreready to combat its smuggling and rum-running ventures. Malone thinks these detectives shewa sadly limited perspective in their lack of wonder at the myriad unexplainable details, andthe suggestive obscurity of the whole case; though he is just as critical of the newspapers,which saw only a morbid sensation and gloated over a minor sadist cult which they might haveproclaimed a horror from the universe’s very heart. But he is content to rest silent inChepachet, calming his nervous system and praying that time may gradually transfer his terribleexperience from the realm of present reality to that of picturesque and semi-mythical remoteness.

Robert Suydam sleeps beside his bride in Greenwood Cemetery. No funeral washeld over the strangely released bones, and relatives are grateful for the swift oblivion whichovertook the case as a whole. The scholar’s connexion with the Red Hook horrors, indeed,was never emblazoned by legal proof; since his death forestalled the inquiry he would otherwisehave faced. His own end is not much mentioned, and the Suydams hope that posterity may recallhim only as a gentle recluse who dabbled in harmless magic and folklore.

As for Red Hook—it is always the same. Suydam came and went; a terrorgathered and faded; but the evil spirit of darkness and squalor broods on amongst the mongrelsin the old brick houses, and prowling bands still parade on unknown errands past windows wherelights and twisted faces unaccountably appear and disappear. Age-old horror is a hydra witha thousand heads, and the cults of darkness are rooted in blasphemies deeper than the well ofDemocritus. The soul of the beast is omnipresent and triumphant, and Red Hook’s legionsof blear-eyed, pockmarked youths still chant and curse and howl as they file from abyss to abyss,none knows whence or whither, pushed on by blind laws of biology which they may never understand.As of old, more people enter Red Hook than leave it on the landward side, and there are alreadyrumours of new canals running underground to certain centres of traffic in liquor and less mentionablethings.

The dance-hall church is now mostly a dance-hall, and queer faces have appearedat night at the windows. Lately a policeman expressed the belief that the filled-up crypt hasbeen dug out again, and for no simply explainable purpose. Who are we to combat poisons olderthan history and mankind? Apes danced in Asia to those horrors, and the cancer lurks secureand spreading where furtiveness hides in rows of decaying brick.

Malone does not shudder without cause—for only the other day an officeroverheard a swarthy squinting hag teaching a small child some whispered patois in the shadowof an areaway. He listened, and thought it very strange when he heard her repeat over and overagain,

“O friend and companion of night, thou who rejoicest in the baying ofdogs and spilt blood, who wanderest in the midst of shades among the tombs, who longest forblood and bringest terror to mortals, Gorgo, Mormo, thousand-faced moon, look favourably onour sacrifices!”
