I have examined maps of the city with the greatest care, yet have never again found the Rued’Auseil. These maps have not been modern maps alone, for I know that names change. Ihave, on the contrary, delved deeply into all the antiquities of the place; and have personallyexplored every region, of whatever name, which could possibly answer to the street I knew asthe Rue d’Auseil. But despite all I have done it remains an humiliating fact that I cannotfind the house, the street, or even the locality, where, during the last months of my impoverishedlife as a student of metaphysics at the university, I heard the music of Erich Zann.

That my memory is broken, I do not wonder; for my health, physical and mental,was gravely disturbed throughout the period of my residence in the Rue d’Auseil, and Irecall that I took none of my few acquaintances there. But that I cannot find the place againis both singular and perplexing; for it was within a half-hour’s walk of the universityand was distinguished by peculiarities which could hardly be forgotten by anyone who had beenthere. I have never met a person who has seen the Rue d’Auseil.

The Rue d’Auseil lay across a dark river bordered by precipitous brickblear-windowed warehouses and spanned by a ponderous bridge of dark stone. It was always shadowyalong that river, as if the smoke of neighbouring factories shut out the sun perpetually. Theriver was also odorous with evil stenches which I have never smelled elsewhere, and which maysome day help me to find it, since I should recognise them at once. Beyond the bridge were narrowcobbled streets with rails; and then came the ascent, at first gradual, but incredibly steepas the Rue d’Auseil was reached.

I have never seen another street as narrow and steep as the Rue d’Auseil.It was almost a cliff, closed to all vehicles, consisting in several places of flights of steps,and ending at the top in a lofty ivied wall. Its paving was irregular, sometimes stone slabs,sometimes cobblestones, and sometimes bare earth with struggling greenish-grey vegetation. Thehouses were tall, peaked-roofed, incredibly old, and crazily leaning backward, forward, andsidewise. Occasionally an opposite pair, both leaning forward, almost met across the streetlike an arch; and certainly they kept most of the light from the ground below. There were afew overhead bridges from house to house across the street.

The inhabitants of that street impressed me peculiarly. At first I thoughtit was because they were all silent and reticent; but later decided it was because they wereall very old. I do not know how I came to live on such a street, but I was not myself when Imoved there. I had been living in many poor places, always evicted for want of money; untilat last I came upon that tottering house in the Rue d’Auseil, kept by the paralytic Blandot.It was the third house from the top of the street, and by far the tallest of them all.

My room was on the fifth story; the only inhabited room there, since the housewas almost empty. On the night I arrived I heard strange music from the peaked garret overhead,and the next day asked old Blandot about it. He told me it was an old German viol-player, astrange dumb man who signed his name as Erich Zann, and who played evenings in a cheap theatreorchestra; adding that Zann’s desire to play in the night after his return from the theatrewas the reason he had chosen this lofty and isolated garret room, whose single gable windowwas the only point on the street from which one could look over the terminating wall at thedeclivity and panorama beyond.

Thereafter I heard Zann every night, and although he kept me awake, I was hauntedby the weirdness of his music. Knowing little of the art myself, I was yet certain that noneof his harmonies had any relation to music I had heard before; and concluded that he was a composerof highly original genius. The longer I listened, the more I was fascinated, until after a weekI resolved to make the old man’s acquaintance.

One night, as he was returning from his work, I intercepted Zann in the hallwayand told him that I would like to know him and be with him when he played. He was a small, lean,bent person, with shabby clothes, blue eyes, grotesque, satyr-like face, and nearly bald head;and at my first words seemed both angered and frightened. My obvious friendliness, however,finally melted him; and he grudgingly motioned to me to follow him up the dark, creaking, andrickety attic stairs. His room, one of only two in the steeply pitched garret, was on the westside, toward the high wall that formed the upper end of the street. Its size was very great,and seemed the greater because of its extraordinary bareness and neglect. Of furniture therewas only a narrow iron bedstead, a dingy washstand, a small table, a large bookcase, an ironmusic-rack, and three old-fashioned chairs. Sheets of music were piled in disorder about thefloor. The walls were of bare boards, and had probably never known plaster; whilst the abundanceof dust and cobwebs made the place seem more deserted than inhabited. Evidently Erich Zann’sworld of beauty lay in some far cosmos of the imagination.

Motioning me to sit down, the dumb man closed the door, turned the large woodenbolt, and lighted a candle to augment the one he had brought with him. He now removed his violfrom its moth-eaten covering, and taking it, seated himself in the least uncomfortable of thechairs. He did not employ the music-rack, but offering no choice and playing from memory, enchantedme for over an hour with strains I had never heard before; strains which must have been of hisown devising. To describe their exact nature is impossible for one unversed in music. They werea kind of fugue, with recurrent passages of the most captivating quality, but to me were notablefor the absence of any of the weird notes I had overheard from my room below on other occasions.

Those haunting notes I had remembered, and had often hummed and whistled inaccuratelyto myself; so when the player at length laid down his bow I asked him if he would render someof them. As I began my request the wrinkled satyr-like face lost the bored placidity it hadpossessed during the playing, and seemed to shew the same curious mixture of anger and frightwhich I had noticed when first I accosted the old man. For a moment I was inclined to use persuasion,regarding rather lightly the whims of senility; and even tried to awaken my host’s weirdermood by whistling a few of the strains to which I had listened the night before. But I did notpursue this course for more than a moment; for when the dumb musician recognised the whistledair his face grew suddenly distorted with an expression wholly beyond analysis, and his long,cold, bony right hand reached out to stop my mouth and silence the crude imitation. As he didthis he further demonstrated his eccentricity by casting a startled glance toward the lone curtainedwindow, as if fearful of some intruder—a glance doubly absurd, since the garret stoodhigh and inaccessible above all the adjacent roofs, this window being the only point on thesteep street, as the concierge had told me, from which one could see over the wall at the summit.

The old man’s glance brought Blandot’s remark to my mind, and witha certain capriciousness I felt a wish to look out over the wide and dizzying panorama of moonlitroofs and city lights beyond the hill-top, which of all the dwellers in the Rue d’Auseilonly this crabbed musician could see. I moved toward the window and would have drawn aside thenondescript curtains, when with a frightened rage even greater than before the dumb lodger wasupon me again; this time motioning with his head toward the door as he nervously strove to dragme thither with both hands. Now thoroughly disgusted with my host, I ordered him to releaseme, and told him I would go at once. His clutch relaxed, and as he saw my disgust and offencehis own anger seemed to subside. He tightened his relaxing grip, but this time in a friendlymanner; forcing me into a chair, then with an appearance of wistfulness crossing to the litteredtable, where he wrote many words with a pencil in the laboured French of a foreigner.

The note which he finally handed me was an appeal for tolerance and forgiveness.Zann said that he was old, lonely, and afflicted with strange fears and nervous disorders connectedwith his music and with other things. He had enjoyed my listening to his music, and wished Iwould come again and not mind his eccentricities. But he could not play to another his weirdharmonies, and could not bear hearing them from another; nor could he bear having anything inhis room touched by another. He had not known until our hallway conversation that I could overhearhis playing in my room, and now asked me if I would arrange with Blandot to take a lower roomwhere I could not hear him in the night. He would, he wrote, defray the difference in rent.

As I sat deciphering the execrable French I felt more lenient toward the oldman. He was a victim of physical and nervous suffering, as was I; and my metaphysical studieshad taught me kindness. In the silence there came a slight sound from the window—the shuttermust have rattled in the night-wind—and for some reason I started almost as violentlyas did Erich Zann. So when I had finished reading I shook my host by the hand, and departedas a friend. The next day Blandot gave me a more expensive room on the third floor, betweenthe apartments of an aged money-lender and the room of a respectable upholsterer. There wasno one on the fourth floor.

It was not long before I found that Zann’s eagerness for my company wasnot as great as it had seemed while he was persuading me to move down from the fifth story.He did not ask me to call on him, and when I did call he appeared uneasy and played listlessly.This was always at night—in the day he slept and would admit no one. My liking for himdid not grow, though the attic room and the weird music seemed to hold an odd fascination forme. I had a curious desire to look out of that window, over the wall and down the unseen slopeat the glittering roofs and spires which must lie outspread there. Once I went up to the garretduring theatre hours, when Zann was away, but the door was locked.

What I did succeed in doing was to overhear the nocturnal playing of the dumbold man. At first I would tiptoe up to my old fifth floor, then I grew bold enough to climbthe last creaking staircase to the peaked garret. There in the narrow hall, outside the bolteddoor with the covered keyhole, I often heard sounds which filled me with an indefinable dread—thedread of vague wonder and brooding mystery. It was not that the sounds were hideous, for theywere not; but that they held vibrations suggesting nothing on this globe of earth, and thatat certain intervals they assumed a symphonic quality which I could hardly conceive as producedby one player. Certainly, Erich Zann was a genius of wild power. As the weeks passed, the playinggrew wilder, whilst the old musician acquired an increasing haggardness and furtiveness pitifulto behold. He now refused to admit me at any time, and shunned me whenever we met on the stairs.

Then one night as I listened at the door I heard the shrieking viol swell intoa chaotic babel of sound; a pandemonium which would have led me to doubt my own shaking sanityhad there not come from behind that barred portal a piteous proof that the horror was real—theawful, inarticulate cry which only a mute can utter, and which rises only in moments of themost terrible fear or anguish. I knocked repeatedly at the door, but received no response. AfterwardI waited in the black hallway, shivering with cold and fear, till I heard the poor musician’sfeeble effort to rise from the floor by the aid of a chair. Believing him just conscious aftera fainting fit, I renewed my rapping, at the same time calling out my name reassuringly. I heardZann stumble to the window and close both shutter and sash, then stumble to the door, whichhe falteringly unfastened to admit me. This time his delight at having me present was real;for his distorted face gleamed with relief while he clutched at my coat as a child clutchesat its mother’s skirts.

Shaking pathetically, the old man forced me into a chair whilst he sank intoanother, beside which his viol and bow lay carelessly on the floor. He sat for some time inactive,nodding oddly, but having a paradoxical suggestion of intense and frightened listening. Subsequentlyhe seemed to be satisfied, and crossing to a chair by the table wrote a brief note, handed itto me, and returned to the table, where he began to write rapidly and incessantly. The noteimplored me in the name of mercy, and for the sake of my own curiosity, to wait where I waswhile he prepared a full account in German of all the marvels and terrors which beset him. Iwaited, and the dumb man’s pencil flew.

It was perhaps an hour later, while I still waited and while the old musician’sfeverishly written sheets still continued to pile up, that I saw Zann start as from the hintof a horrible shock. Unmistakably he was looking at the curtained window and listening shudderingly.Then I half fancied I heard a sound myself; though it was not a horrible sound, but rather anexquisitely low and infinitely distant musical note, suggesting a player in one of the neighbouringhouses, or in some abode beyond the lofty wall over which I had never been able to look. UponZann the effect was terrible, for dropping his pencil suddenly he rose, seized his viol, andcommenced to rend the night with the wildest playing I had ever heard from his bow save whenlistening at the barred door.

It would be useless to describe the playing of Erich Zann on that dreadfulnight. It was more horrible than anything I had ever overheard, because I could now see theexpression of his face, and could realise that this time the motive was stark fear. He was tryingto make a noise; to ward something off or drown something out—what, I could not imagine,awesome though I felt it must be. The playing grew fantastic, delirious, and hysterical, yetkept to the last the qualities of supreme genius which I knew this strange old man possessed.I recognised the air—it was a wild Hungarian dance popular in the theatres, and I reflectedfor a moment that this was the first time I had ever heard Zann play the work of another composer.

Louder and louder, wilder and wilder, mounted the shrieking and whining ofthat desperate viol. The player was dripping with an uncanny perspiration and twisted like amonkey, always looking frantically at the curtained window. In his frenzied strains I couldalmost see shadowy satyrs and Bacchanals dancing and whirling insanely through seething abyssesof clouds and smoke and lightning. And then I thought I heard a shriller, steadier note thatwas not from the viol; a calm, deliberate, purposeful, mocking note from far away in the west.

At this juncture the shutter began to rattle in a howling night-wind whichhad sprung up outside as if in answer to the mad playing within. Zann’s screaming violnow outdid itself, emitting sounds I had never thought a viol could emit. The shutter rattledmore loudly, unfastened, and commenced slamming against the window. Then the glass broke shiveringlyunder the persistent impacts, and the chill wind rushed in, making the candles sputter and rustlingthe sheets of paper on the table where Zann had begun to write out his horrible secret. I lookedat Zann, and saw that he was past conscious observation. His blue eyes were bulging, glassy,and sightless, and the frantic playing had become a blind, mechanical, unrecognisable orgy thatno pen could even suggest.

A sudden gust, stronger than the others, caught up the manuscript and boreit toward the window. I followed the flying sheets in desperation, but they were gone beforeI reached the demolished panes. Then I remembered my old wish to gaze from this window, theonly window in the Rue d’Auseil from which one might see the slope beyond the wall, andthe city outspread beneath. It was very dark, but the city’s lights always burned, andI expected to see them there amidst the rain and wind. Yet when I looked from that highest ofall gable windows, looked while the candles sputtered and the insane viol howled with the night-wind,I saw no city spread below, and no friendly lights gleaming from remembered streets, but onlythe blackness of space illimitable; unimagined space alive with motion and music, and havingno semblance to anything on earth. And as I stood there looking in terror, the wind blew outboth the candles in that ancient peaked garret, leaving me in savage and impenetrable darknesswith chaos and pandemonium before me, and the daemon madness of that night-baying viol behindme.

I staggered back in the dark, without the means of striking a light, crashingagainst the table, overturning a chair, and finally groping my way to the place where the blacknessscreamed with shocking music. To save myself and Erich Zann I could at least try, whatever thepowers opposed to me. Once I thought some chill thing brushed me, and I screamed, but my screamcould not be heard above that hideous viol. Suddenly out of the blackness the madly sawing bowstruck me, and I knew I was close to the player. I felt ahead, touched the back of Zann’schair, and then found and shook his shoulder in an effort to bring him to his senses.

He did not respond, and still the viol shrieked on without slackening. I movedmy hand to his head, whose mechanical nodding I was able to stop, and shouted in his ear thatwe must both flee from the unknown things of the night. But he neither answered me nor abatedthe frenzy of his unutterable music, while all through the garret strange currents of wind seemedto dance in the darkness and babel. When my hand touched his ear I shuddered, though I knewnot why—knew not why till I felt of the still face; the ice-cold, stiffened, unbreathingface whose glassy eyes bulged uselessly into the void. And then, by some miracle finding thedoor and the large wooden bolt, I plunged wildly away from that glassy-eyed thing in the dark,and from the ghoulish howling of that accursed viol whose fury increased even as I plunged.

Leaping, floating, flying down those endless stairs through the dark house;racing mindlessly out into the narrow, steep, and ancient street of steps and tottering houses;clattering down steps and over cobbles to the lower streets and the putrid canyon-walled river;panting across the great dark bridge to the broader, healthier streets and boulevards we know;all these are terrible impressions that linger with me. And I recall that there was no wind,and that the moon was out, and that all the lights of the city twinkled.

Despite my most careful searches and investigations, I have never since beenable to find the Rue d’Auseil. But I am not wholly sorry; either for this or for the lossin undreamable abysses of the closely written sheets which alone could have explained the musicof Erich Zann.
