It is said that in Ulthar, which lies beyond the river Skai, no man may kill a cat; and thisI can verily believe as I gaze upon him who sitteth purring before the fire. For the cat iscryptic, and close to strange things which men cannot see. He is the soul of antique Aegyptus,and bearer of tales from forgotten cities in Meroë and Ophir. He is the kin of the jungle’slords, and heir to the secrets of hoary and sinister Africa. The Sphinx is his cousin, and hespeaks her language; but he is more ancient than the Sphinx, and remembers that which she hathforgotten.

In Ulthar, before ever the burgesses forbade the killing of cats, there dweltan old cotter and his wife who delighted to trap and slay the cats of their neighbours. Whythey did this I know not; save that many hate the voice of the cat in the night, and take itill that cats should run stealthily about yards and gardens at twilight. But whatever the reason,this old man and woman took pleasure in trapping and slaying every cat which came near to theirhovel; and from some of the sounds heard after dark, many villagers fancied that the mannerof slaying was exceedingly peculiar. But the villagers did not discuss such things with theold man and his wife; because of the habitual expression on the withered faces of the two, andbecause their cottage was so small and so darkly hidden under spreading oaks at the back ofa neglected yard. In truth, much as the owners of cats hated these odd folk, they feared themmore; and instead of berating them as brutal assassins, merely took care that no cherished petor mouser should stray toward the remote hovel under the dark trees. When through some unavoidableoversight a cat was missed, and sounds heard after dark, the loser would lament impotently;or console himself by thanking Fate that it was not one of his children who had thus vanished.For the people of Ulthar were simple, and knew not whence it is all cats first came.

One day a caravan of strange wanderers from the South entered the narrow cobbledstreets of Ulthar. Dark wanderers they were, and unlike the other roving folk who passed throughthe village twice every year. In the market-place they told fortunes for silver, and boughtgay beads from the merchants. What was the land of these wanderers none could tell; but it wasseen that they were given to strange prayers, and that they had painted on the sides of theirwagons strange figures with human bodies and the heads of cats, hawks, rams, and lions. Andthe leader of the caravan wore a head-dress with two horns and a curious disc betwixt the horns.

There was in this singular caravan a little boy with no father or mother, butonly a tiny black kitten to cherish. The plague had not been kind to him, yet had left him thissmall furry thing to mitigate his sorrow; and when one is very young, one can find great reliefin the lively antics of a black kitten. So the boy whom the dark people called Menes smiledmore often than he wept as he sate playing with his graceful kitten on the steps of an oddlypainted wagon.

On the third morning of the wanderers’ stay in Ulthar, Menes could notfind his kitten; and as he sobbed aloud in the market-place certain villagers told him of theold man and his wife, and of sounds heard in the night. And when he heard these things his sobbinggave place to meditation, and finally to prayer. He stretched out his arms toward the sun andprayed in a tongue no villager could understand; though indeed the villagers did not try veryhard to understand, since their attention was mostly taken up by the sky and the odd shapesthe clouds were assuming. It was very peculiar, but as the little boy uttered his petition thereseemed to form overhead the shadowy, nebulous figures of exotic things; of hybrid creaturescrowned with horn-flanked discs. Nature is full of such illusions to impress the imaginative.

That night the wanderers left Ulthar, and were never seen again. And the householderswere troubled when they noticed that in all the village there was not a cat to be found. Fromeach hearth the familiar cat had vanished; cats large and small, black, grey, striped, yellow,and white. Old Kranon, the burgomaster, swore that the dark folk had taken the cats away inrevenge for the killing of Menes’ kitten; and cursed the caravan and the little boy. ButNith, the lean notary, declared that the old cotter and his wife were more likely persons tosuspect; for their hatred of cats was notorious and increasingly bold. Still, no one durst complainto the sinister couple; even when little Atal, the innkeeper’s son, vowed that he hadat twilight seen all the cats of Ulthar in that accursed yard under the trees, pacing very slowlyand solemnly in a circle around the cottage, two abreast, as if in performance of some unheard-ofrite of beasts. The villagers did not know how much to believe from so small a boy; and thoughthey feared that the evil pair had charmed the cats to their death, they preferred not to chidethe old cotter till they met him outside his dark and repellent yard.

So Ulthar went to sleep in vain anger; and when the people awaked at dawn—behold!every cat was back at his accustomed hearth! Large and small, black, grey, striped, yellow,and white, none was missing. Very sleek and fat did the cats appear, and sonorous with purringcontent. The citizens talked with one another of the affair, and marvelled not a little. OldKranon again insisted that it was the dark folk who had taken them, since cats did not returnalive from the cottage of the ancient man and his wife. But all agreed on one thing: that therefusal of all the cats to eat their portions of meat or drink their saucers of milk was exceedinglycurious. And for two whole days the sleek, lazy cats of Ulthar would touch no food, but onlydoze by the fire or in the sun.

It was fully a week before the villagers noticed that no lights were appearingat dusk in the windows of the cottage under the trees. Then the lean Nith remarked that no onehad seen the old man or his wife since the night the cats were away. In another week the burgomasterdecided to overcome his fears and call at the strangely silent dwelling as a matter of duty,though in so doing he was careful to take with him Shang the blacksmith and Thul the cutterof stone as witnesses. And when they had broken down the frail door they found only this: twocleanly picked human skeletons on the earthen floor, and a number of singular beetles crawlingin the shadowy corners.

There was subsequently much talk among the burgesses of Ulthar. Zath, the coroner,disputed at length with Nith, the lean notary; and Kranon and Shang and Thul were overwhelmedwith questions. Even little Atal, the innkeeper’s son, was closely questioned and givena sweetmeat as reward. They talked of the old cotter and his wife, of the caravan of dark wanderers,of small Menes and his black kitten, of the prayer of Menes and of the sky during that prayer,of the doings of the cats on the night the caravan left, and of what was later found in thecottage under the dark trees in the repellent yard.

And in the end the burgesses passed that remarkable law which is told of bytraders in Hatheg and discussed by travellers in Nir; namely, that in Ulthar no man may killa cat.
