EDITOR’S NOTE: Alonzo Hasbrouck Typer of Kingston, N.Y., was last seen and recognised onApril 17, 1908, around noon, at the Hotel Richmond in Batavia. He was the only survivor of anancient Ulster County family, and was fifty-three years old at the time of his disappearance.

Mr. Typer was educated privately and at Columbia and Heidelberg Universities.All his life was spent as a student; the field of his researches including many obscure andgenerally feared borderlands of human knowledge. His papers on vampirism, ghouls, and poltergeistphenomena were privately printed after rejection by many publishers. He resigned from the Societyfor Psychical Research in 1902 after a series of peculiarly bitter controversies.

At various times Mr. Typer travelled extensively, sometimes dropping out ofsight for long periods. He is known to have visited obscure spots in Nepal, India, Thibet, andIndo-China, and passed most of the year 1899 on mysterious Easter Island. The extensive searchfor Mr. Typer after his disappearance yielded no results, and his estate was divided among distantcousins in New York City.

The diary herewith presented was allegedly found in the ruins of a large countryhouse near Attica, N.Y., which had borne a curiously sinister reputation for generations beforeits collapse. The edifice was very old, antedating the general white settlement of the region,and had formed the home of a strange and secretive family named van der Heyl, which had migratedfrom Albany in 1746 under a curious cloud of witchcraft suspicion. The structure probably datedfrom about 1760.

Of the history of the van der Heyls very little is known. They remained entirelyaloof from their normal neighbours, employed negro servants brought directly from Africa andspeaking little English, and educated their children privately and at European colleges. Thoseof them who went out into the world were soon lost to sight, though not before gaining evilrepute for association with Black Mass groups and cults of even darker significance.

Around the dreaded house a straggling village arose, populated by Indians andlater by renegades from the surrounding country, which bore the dubious name of Chorazin. Ofthe singular hereditary strains which afterward appeared in the mixed Chorazin villagers, severalmonographs have been written by ethnologists. Just behind the village, and in sight of the vander Heyl house, is a steep hill crowned with a peculiar ring of ancient standing stones whichthe Iroquois always regarded with fear and loathing. The origin and nature of the stones, whosedate, according to archaeological and climatological evidence, must be fabulously early, isa problem still unsolved.

From about 1795 onward, the legends of the incoming pioneers and later populationhave much to say about strange cries and chants proceeding at certain seasons from Chorazinand from the great house and hill of standing stones; though there is reason to suppose thatthe noises ceased about 1872, when the entire van der Heyl household—servants and all—suddenlyand simultaneously disappeared.

Thenceforward the house was deserted; for other disastrous events—includingthree unexplained deaths, five disappearances, and four cases of sudden insanity—occurredwhen later owners and interested visitors attempted to stay in it. The house, village, and extensiverural areas on all sides reverted to the state and were auctioned off in the absence of discoverablevan der Heyl heirs. Since about 1890 the owners (successively the late Charles A. Shields andhis son Oscar S. Shields, of Buffalo) have left the entire property in a state of absolute neglect,and have warned all inquirers not to visit the region.

Of those known to have approached the house during the last forty years, mostwere occult students, police officers, newspaper men, and odd characters from abroad. Amongthe latter was a mysterious Eurasian, probably from Cochin-China, whose later appearance withblank mind and bizarre mutilations excited wide press notice in 1903.

Mr. Typer’s diary—a book about 6 × 3½ inches in size, withtough paper and an oddly durable binding of thin sheet metal—was discovered in the possessionof one of the decadent Chorazin villagers on Nov. 16, 1935, by a state policeman sent to investigatethe rumoured collapse of the deserted van der Heyl mansion. The house had indeed fallen, obviouslyfrom sheer age and decrepitude, in the severe gale of Nov. 12. Disintegration was peculiarlycomplete, and no thorough search of the ruins could be made for several weeks. John Eagle, theswarthy, simian-faced, Indian-like villager who had the diary, said that he found the book quitenear the surface of the debris, in what must have been an upper front room.

Very little of the contents of the house could be identified, though an enormousand astonishingly solid brick vault in the cellar (whose ancient iron door had to be blastedopen because of the strangely figured and perversely tenacious lock) remained intact and presentedseveral puzzling features. For one thing, the walls were covered with still undeciphered hieroglyphsroughly incised in the brickwork. Another peculiarity was a huge circular aperture in the rearof the vault, blocked by a cave-in evidently caused by the collapse of the house.

But strangest of all was the apparently recent deposit of some foetid,slimy, pitch-black substance on the flagstoned floor, extending in a yard-broad, irregular linewith one end at the blocked circular aperture. Those who first opened the vault declared thatthe place smelled like the snake-house at a zoo.

The diary, which was apparently designed solely to cover an investigation ofthe dreaded van der Heyl house by the vanished Mr. Typer, has been proved by handwriting expertsto be genuine. The script shews signs of increasing nervous strain as it progresses toward theend, in places becoming almost illegible. Chorazin villagers—whose stupidity and taciturnitybaffle all students of the region and its secrets—admit no recollection of Mr. Typer asdistinguished from other rash visitors to the dreaded house.

The text of the diary is here given verbatim and without comment. How to interpretit, and what, other than the writer’s madness, to infer from it, the reader must decidefor himself. Only the future can tell what its value may be in solving a generation-old mystery.It may be remarked that genealogists confirm Mr. Typer’s belated memory in the matter ofAdriaen Sleght.

THE DIARY

April 17, 1908Arrived here about 6 p.m. Had to walk all the way from Attica in the teethof an oncoming storm, for no one would rent me a horse or rig, and I can’t run an automobile.This place is even worse than I had expected, and I dread what is coming, even though I longat the same time to learn the secret. All too soon will come the night—the old WalpurgisSabbat horror—and after that time in Wales I know what to look for. Whatever comes, I shallnot flinch. Prodded by some unfathomable urge, I have given my whole life to the quest of unholymysteries. I came here for nothing else, and will not quarrel with fate.

It was very dark when I got here, though the sun had by no means set. The storm-cloudswere the densest I had ever seen, and I could not have found my way but for the lightning flashes.The village is a hateful little backwater, and its few inhabitants no better than idiots. Oneof them saluted me in a queer way, as if he knew me. I could see very little of the landscape—justa small, swampy valley of strange brown weed-stalks and dead fungi surrounded by scraggly, evillytwisted trees with bare boughs. But behind the village is a dismal-looking hill on whose summitis a circle of great stones with another stone at the centre. That, without question, is thevile primordial thing V——— told me about at the N——— estbat.

The great house lies in the midst of a park all overgrown with curious-lookingbriers. I could scarcely break through, and when I did the vast age and decrepitude of the buildingalmost stopped me from entering. The place looked filthy and diseased, and I wondered how soleprous a bulk could hang together. It is wooden; and though its original lines are hidden bya bewildering tangle of wings added at various dates, I think it was first built in the squarecolonial fashion of New England. Probably that was easier to build than a Dutch stone house—andthen, too, I recall that Dirck van der Heyl’s wife was from Salem, a daughter of the unmentionableAbaddon Corey. There was a small pillared porch, and I got under it just as the storm burst.It was a fiendish tempest—black as midnight, with rain in sheets, thunder and lightninglike the day of general dissolution, and a wind that actually clawed at me. The door was unlocked,so I took out my electric torch and went inside. Dust was inches thick on floor and furniture,and the place smelled like a mould-caked tomb. There was a hall reaching all the way through,and a curving staircase on the right. I ploughed a way upstairs and selected this front roomto camp out in. The whole place seems fully furnished, though most of the furniture is breakingdown. This is written at eight o’clock, after a cold meal from my travelling-case. Afterthis the village people will bring me supplies—though they won’t agree to come anycloser than the ruins of the park gate until (as they say) later. I wish I could get rid ofan unpleasant feeling of familiarity with this place.

LaterI am conscious of several presences in this house. One in particular is decidedlyhostile toward me—a malevolent will which is seeking to break down my own and overcome me.I must not countenance this for an instant, but must use all my forces to resist it. It is appallinglyevil, and definitely non-human. I think it must be allied to powers outside earth—powersin the spaces behind time and beyond the universe. It towers like a colossus, bearing out whatis said in the Aklo writings. There is such a feeling of vast size connected with it that Iwonder these chambers can contain its bulk—and yet it has no visible bulk. Its age mustbe unutterably vast—shockingly, indescribably so.

April 18Slept very little last night. At 3 a.m. a strange, creeping wind began to pervadethe whole region—ever rising until the house rocked as if in a typhoon. As I went downthe staircase to see to the rattling front door the darkness took half-visible forms in my imagination.Just below the landing I was pushed violently from behind—by the wind, I suppose, thoughI could have sworn I saw the dissolving outlines of a gigantic black paw as I turned quicklyabout. I did not lose my footing, but safely finished the descent and shot the heavy bolt ofthe dangerously shaking door.

I had not meant to explore the house till dawn; yet now, unable to sleep againand fired with mixed terror and curiosity, I felt reluctant to postpone my search. With my powerfultorch I ploughed through the dust to the great south parlour, where I knew the portraits wouldbe. There they were, just as V——— had said, and as I seemed to know from someobscurer source as well. Some were so blackened, mouldy, and dust-clouded that I could makelittle or nothing of them, but from those I could trace I recognised that they were indeed ofthe hateful line of the van der Heyls. Some of the paintings seemed to suggest faces I had known;but just what faces, I could not recall.

The outlines of that frightful hybrid Joris—spawned in 1773 by old Dirck’syoungest daughter—were clearest of all, and I could trace the green eyes and the serpentlook in his face. Every time I shut off the flashlight that face would seem to glow in the darkuntil I half fancied it shone with a faint, greenish light of its own. The more I looked, themore evil it seemed, and I turned away to avoid hallucinations of changing expression.

But that to which I turned was even worse. The long, dour face, small, closelyset eyes, and swine-like features identified it at once, even though the artist had strivento make the snout look as human as possible. This was what V——— had whisperedabout. As I stared in horror, I thought the eyes took on a reddish glow—and for a momentthe background seemed replaced by an alien and seemingly irrelevant scene—a lone, bleakmoor beneath a dirty yellow sky, whereon grew a wretched-looking blackthorn bush. Fearing formy sanity, I rushed from that accursed gallery to the dust-cleared corner upstairs where I havemy “camp”.

LaterDecided to explore some of the labyrinthine wings of the house by daylight.I cannot get lost, for my footprints are distinct in the ankle-deep dust—and I can traceother identifying marks when necessary. It is curious how easily I learn the intricate windingsof the corridors. Followed a long, outflung northerly “ell” to its extremity, andcame to a locked door, which I forced. Beyond was a very small room quite crowded with furniture,and with the panelling badly worm-eaten. On the outer wall I spied a black space behind therotting woodwork, and discovered a narrow secret passage leading downward to unknown black depths.It was a steeply inclined chute or tunnel without steps or hand-holds, and I wondered what itsuse could have been.

Above the fireplace was a mouldy painting, which I found on close inspectionto be that of a young woman in the dress of the late eighteenth century. The face is of classicbeauty, yet with the most fiendishly evil expression which I have ever known the human countenanceto bear. Not merely callousness, greed, and cruelty, but some quality hideous beyond human comprehensionseems to sit upon those finely carved features. And as I looked it seemed to me that the artist—orthe slow processes of mould and decay—had imparted to that pallid complexion a sickly greenishcast, and the least suggestion of an almost imperceptibly scaly texture. Later I ascended tothe attic, where I found several chests of strange books—many of utterly alien aspect inletters and in physical form alike. One contained variants of the Aklo formulae which I hadnever known to exist. I have not yet examined the books on the dusty shelves downstairs.

April 19There are certainly unseen presences here, even though the dust as yet bearsno footprints but my own. Cut a path through the briers yesterday to the park gate where mysupplies are left, but this morning I found it closed. Very odd, since the bushes are hardlystirring with spring sap. Again I had that feeling of something at hand so colossal that thechambers can scarcely contain it. This time I feel more than one of the presences is of sucha size, and I know now that the third Aklo ritual—which I found in that book in the atticyesterday—would make such beings solid and visible. Whether I shall dare to try this materialisationremains to be seen. The perils are great.

Last night I began to glimpse evanescent shadow-faces and forms in the dimcorners of the halls and chambers—faces and forms so hideous and loathsome that I darenot describe them. They seem allied in substance to that titanic paw which tried to push medown the stairs night before last—and must of course be phantoms of my disturbed imagination.What I am seeking would not be quite like these things. I have seen the paw again—sometimesalone and sometimes with its mate—but I have resolved to ignore all such phenomena.

Early this afternoon I explored the cellar for the first time—descendingby a ladder found in a storeroom, since the wooden steps had rotted away. The whole place isa mass of nitrous encrustations, with amorphous mounds marking the spots where various objectshave disintegrated. At the farther end is a narrow passage which seems to extend under the northerly“ell” where I found the little locked room, and at the end of this is a heavy brickwall with a locked iron door. Apparently belonging to a vault of some sort, this wall and doorbear evidences of eighteenth-century workmanship and must be contemporary with the oldest additionsto the house—clearly pre-Revolutionary. On the lock—which is obviously older thanthe rest of the ironwork—are engraved certain symbols which I cannot decipher.

V——— had not told me about this vault. It fills me with a greaterdisquiet than anything else I have seen, for every time I approach it I have an almost irresistibleimpulse to listen for something. Hitherto no untoward sounds have marked my stayin this malign place. As I left the cellar I wished devoutly that the steps were still there—formy progress up the ladder seemed maddeningly slow. I do not want to go down there again—andyet some evil genius urges me to try it at night if I would learn what is to be learned.

April 20I have sounded the depths of horror—only to be made aware of still lowerdepths. Last night the temptation was too strong, and in the black small hours I descended oncemore into that nitrous, hellish cellar with my flashlight—tiptoeing among the amorphousheaps to that terrible brick wall and locked door. I made no sound, and refrained from whisperingany of the incantations I knew, but I listened—listened with mad intentness.

At last I heard the sounds from beyond those barred plates of sheet iron—themenacing padding and muttering, as of gigantic night-things within. Then, too, there was a damnableslithering, as of a vast serpent or sea-beast dragging its monstrous folds over a paved floor.Nearly paralysed with fright, I glanced at the huge rusty lock, and at the alien, cryptic hieroglyphsgraven upon it. They were signs I could not recognise, and something in their vaguely Mongoloidtechnique hinted at a blasphemous and indescribable antiquity. At times I fancied I could seethem glowing with a greenish light.

I turned to flee, but found that vision of the titan paws before me—thegreat talons seeming to swell and become more tangible as I gazed. Out of the cellar’sevil blackness they stretched, with shadowy hints of scaly wrists beyond them, and with a waxing,malignant will guiding their horrible gropings. Then I heard from behind me—within thatabominable vault—a fresh burst of muffled reverberations which seemed to echo from farhorizons like distant thunder. Impelled by this greater fear, I advanced toward the shadowypaws with my flashlight and saw them vanish before the full force of the electric beam. Thenup the ladder I raced, torch between my teeth, nor did I rest till I had regained my upstairs“camp”.

What is to be my ultimate end, I dare not imagine. I came as a seeker, butnow I know that something is seeking me. I could not leave if I wished. This morning I triedto go to the gate for my supplies, but found the briers twisted tightly in my path. It was thesame in every direction—behind and on all sides of the house. In places the brown, barbedvines had uncurled to astonishing heights—forming a steel-like hedge against my egress.The villagers are connected with all this. When I went indoors I found my supplies in the greatfront hall, though without any clue to how they came there. I am sorry now that I swept thedust away. I shall scatter some more and see what prints are left.

This afternoon I read some of the books in the great shadowy library at therear of the ground floor, and formed certain suspicions which I cannot bear to mention. I hadnever seen the text of Pnakotic Manuscripts or of the Eltdown Shards before, and would not havecome here had I known what they contain. I believe it is too late now—for the awful Sabbatis only ten days away. It is for that night of horror that they are saving me.

April 21I have been studying the portraits again. Some have names attached, and I noticedone—of an evil-faced woman, painted some two centuries ago—which puzzled me. It borethe name of Trintje van der Heyl Sleght, and I have a distinct impression that I once met thename of Sleght before, in some significant connexion. It was not horrible then, though it becomesso now. I must rack my brain for the clue.

The eyes of these pictures haunt me. Is it possible that some of themare emerging more distinctly from their shrouds of dust and decay and mould? The serpent-facedand swine-faced warlocks stare horribly at me from their blackened frames, and a score of otherhybrid faces are beginning to peer out of shadowy backgrounds. There is a hideous look of familyresemblance in them all—and that which is human is more horrible than that which is non-human.I wish they reminded me less of other faces—faces I have known in the past. They were anaccursed line, and Cornelis of Leyden was the worst of them. It was he who broke downthe barrier after his father had found that other key. I am sure that V——— knowsonly a fragment of the horrible truth, so that I am indeed unprepared and defenceless. Whatof the line before old Claes? What he did in 1591 could never have been done without generationsof evil heritage, or some link with the outside. And what of the branches this monstrous linehas sent forth? Are they scattered over the world, all awaiting their common heritage of horror?I must recall the place where I once so particularly noticed the name of Sleght.

I wish I could be sure that these pictures stay always in their frames. Forseveral hours now I have been seeing momentary presences like the earlier paws and shadow-facesand forms, but closely duplicating some of the ancient portraits. Somehow I can never glimpsea presence and the portrait it resembles at the same time—the light is always wrong forone or the other, or else the presence and the portrait are in different rooms.

Perhaps, as I have hoped, the presences are mere figments of imagination; butI cannot be sure now. Some are female, and of the same hellish beauty as the picture in thelittle locked room. Some are like no portrait I have seen, yet make me feel that their paintedfeatures lurk unrecognised beneath the mould and soot of canvases I cannot decipher. A few,I desperately fear, have approached materialisation in solid or semi-solid form—and somehave a dreadful and unexplained familiarity.

There is one woman who in fell loveliness excels all the rest. Her poisonouscharms are like a honeyed flower growing on the brink of hell. When I look at her closely shevanishes, only to reappear later. Her face has a greenish cast, and now and then I fancy I canspy a suspicion of the squamose in its smooth texture. Who is she? Is she that being who musthave dwelt in the little locked room a century and more ago?

My supplies were again left in the front hall—that, clearly, is to bethe custom. I had sprinkled dust about to catch footprints, but this morning the whole hallwas swept clean by some unknown agency.

April 22This has been a day of horrible discovery. I explored the cobwebbed attic again,and found a carved, crumbling chest—plainly from Holland—full of blasphemous booksand papers far older than any hitherto encountered here. There was a Greek Necronomicon,a Norman-French Livre d’Eibon, and a first edition of old Ludvig Prinn’s De Vermis Mysteriis. But the old bound manuscript was the worst. It was in low Latin, andfull of the strange, crabbed handwriting of Claes van der Heyl—being evidently the diaryor notebook kept by him between 1560 and 1580. When I unfastened the blackened silver claspand opened the yellowed leaves a coloured drawing fluttered out—the likeness of a monstrouscreature resembling nothing so much as a squid, beaked and tentacled, with great yellow eyes,and with certain abominable approximations to the human form in its contours.

I had never before seen so utterly loathsome and nightmarish a form. On thepaws, feet, and head-tentacles were curious claws—reminding me of the colossal shadow-shapeswhich have groped so horribly in my path—while the entity as a whole sat upon a great throne-likepedestal inscribed with unknown hieroglyphs of vaguely Chinese cast. About both writing andimage there hung an air of sinister evil so profound and pervasive that I could not think itthe product of any one world or age. Rather must that monstrous shape be a focus for all theevil in unbounded space, throughout the aeons past and to come—and those eldritch symbolsbe vile sentient eikons endowed with a morbid life of their own and ready to wrest themselvesfrom the parchment for the reader’s destruction. To the meaning of that monster and ofthose hieroglyphs I had no clue, but I knew that both had been traced with a hellish precisionand for no namable purpose. As I studied the leering characters, their kinship to the symbolson that ominous lock in the cellar became more and more manifest. I left the picture in theattic, for never could sleep come to me with such a thing nearby.

All the afternoon and evening I read in the manuscript book of old Claes vander Heyl, and what I read will cloud and make horrible whatever period of life lies ahead ofme. The genesis of the world, and of previous worlds, unfolded itself before my eyes. I learnedof the city Shamballah, built by the Lemurians fifty million years ago, yet inviolate stillbehind its walls of psychic force in the eastern desert. I learned of the Book of Dzyan, whosefirst six chapters antedate the earth, and which was old when the lords of Venus came throughspace in their ships to civilise our planet. And I saw recorded in writing for the first timethat name which others had spoken to me in whispers, and which I had known in a closer and morehorrible way—the shunned and dreaded name of Yian-Ho.

In several places I was held up by passages requiring a key. Eventually, fromvarious allusions, I gathered that old Claes had not dared to embody all his knowledge in onebook, but had left certain points for another. Neither volume can be wholly intelligible withoutits fellow; hence I have resolved to find the second one if it lies anywhere within this accursedhouse. Though plainly a prisoner, I have not lost my lifelong zeal for the unknown; and am determinedto probe the cosmos as deeply as possible before doom comes.

April 23Searched all the morning for the second diary, and found it about noon in adesk in the little locked room. Like the first, it is in Claes van der Heyl’s barbarousLatin; and it seems to consist of disjointed notes referring to various sections of the other.Glancing through the leaves, I spied at once the abhorred name of Yian-Ho—of Yian-Ho, thatlost and hidden city wherein brood aeon-old secrets, and of which dim memories older than thebody lurk behind the minds of all men. It was repeated many times, and the text around it wasstrown with crudely drawn hieroglyphs plainly akin to those on the pedestal in that hellishdrawing I had seen. Here, clearly, lay the key to that monstrous tentacled shape and its forbiddenmessage. With this knowledge I ascended the creaking stairs to the attic of cobwebs and horror.

When I tried to open the attic door it stuck as never before. Several timesit resisted every effort to open it, and when at last it gave way I had a distinct feeling thatsome colossal, unseen shape had suddenly released it—a shape that soared away on non-materialbut audibly beating wings. When I found the horrible drawing I felt that it was not preciselywhere I had left it. Applying the key in the other book, I soon saw that the latter was no instantguide to the secret. It was only a clue—a clue to a secret too black to be left lightlyguarded. It would take hours—perhaps days—to extract the awful message.

Shall I live long enough to learn the secret? The shadowy black arms and pawshaunt my vision more and more now, and seem even more titanic than at first. Nor am I ever longfree from those vague, unhuman presences whose nebulous bulk seems too vast for the chambersto contain. And now and then the grotesque, evanescent faces and forms, and the mocking portrait-shapes,troop before me in bewildering confusion.

Truly, there are terrible primal arcana of earth which had better be left unknownand unevoked; dread secrets which have nothing to do with man, and which man may learn onlyin exchange for peace and sanity; cryptic truths which make the knower evermore an alien amonghis kind, and cause him to walk alone on earth. Likewise are there dread survivals of thingsolder and more potent than man; things that have blasphemously straggled down through the aeonsto ages never meant for them; monstrous entities that have lain sleeping endlessly in incrediblecrypts and remote caverns, outside the laws of reason and causation, and ready to be waked bysuch blasphemers as shall know their dark forbidden signs and furtive passwords.

April 24Studied the picture and the key all day in the attic. At sunset I heard strangesounds, of a sort not encountered before and seeming to come from far away. Listening, I realisedthat they must flow from that queer abrupt hill with the circle of standing stones, which liesbehind the village and some distance north of the house. I had heard that there was a path fromthe house leading up that hill to the primal cromlech, and had suspected that at certain seasonsthe van der Heyls had much occasion to use it; but the whole matter had hitherto lain latentin my consciousness. The present sounds consisted of a shrill piping intermingled with a peculiarand hideous sort of hissing or whistling—a bizarre, alien kind of music, like nothing whichthe annals of earth describe. It was very faint, and soon faded, but the matter has set me thinking.It is toward the hill that the long, northerly “ell” with the secret chute, and thelocked brick vault under it, extend. Can there be any connexion which has so far eluded me?

April 25I have made a peculiar and disturbing discovery about the nature of my imprisonment.Drawn toward the hill by a sinister fascination, I found the briers giving way before me, but in that direction only. There is a ruined gate, and beneath the bushes the traces ofthe old path no doubt exist. The briers extend part way up and all around the hill, though thesummit with the standing stones bears only a curious growth of moss and stunted grass. I climbedthe hill and spent several hours there, noticing a strange wind which seems always to sweeparound the forbidding monoliths and which sometimes seems to whisper in an oddly articulatethough darkly cryptic fashion.

These stones, both in colour and in texture, resemble nothing I have seen elsewhere.They are neither brown nor grey, but rather of a dirty yellow merging into an evil green andhaving a suggestion of chameleon-like variability. Their texture is queerly like that of a scaledserpent, and is inexplicably nauseous to the touch—being as cold and clammy as the skinof a toad or other reptile. Near the central menhir is a singular stone-rimmed hollow whichI cannot explain, but which may possibly form the entrance to a long-choked well or tunnel.When I sought to descend the hill at points away from the house I found the briers interceptingme as before, though the path toward the house was easily retraceable.

April 26Up on the hill again this evening, and found that windy whispering much moredistinct. The almost angry humming came close to actual speech—of a vague sibilant sort—andreminded me of the strange piping chant I had heard from afar. After sunset there came a curiousflash of premature summer lightning on the northern horizon, followed almost at once by a queerdetonation high in the fading sky. Something about this phenomenon disturbed me greatly, andI could not escape the impression that the noise ended in a kind of unhuman hissing speech whichtrailed off into guttural cosmic laughter. Is my mind tottering at last, or has my unwarrantedcuriosity evoked unheard-of horrors from the twilight spaces? The Sabbat is close at hand now.What will be the end?

April 27At last my dreams are to be realised! Whether or not my life or spirit or bodywill be claimed, I shall enter the gateway! Progress in deciphering those crucial hieroglyphsin the picture has been slow, but this afternoon I hit upon the final clue. By evening I knewtheir meaning—and that meaning can apply in only one way to the things I have encounteredin this house.

There is beneath this house—sepulchred I know not where—an ancientforgotten One who will shew me the gateway I would enter, and give me the lost signs and wordsI shall need. How long It has lain buried here—forgotten save by those who reared the stoneson the hill, and by those who later sought out this place and built this house—I cannotconjecture. It was in search of this Thing, beyond question, that Hendrik van der Heyl cameto New-Netherland in 1638. Men of this earth know It not, save in the secret whispers of thefear-shaken few who have found or inherited the key. No human eye has even yet glimpsed It—unless,perhaps, the vanished wizards of this house delved farther than has been guessed.

With knowledge of the symbols came likewise a mastery of the Seven Lost Signsof Terror—and a tacit recognition of the hideous and unutterable Words of Fear. All thatremains for me to accomplish is the Chant which will transfigure that Forgotten One who is Guardianof the Ancient Gateway. I marvel much at the Chant. It is composed of strange and repellentgutturals and disturbing sibilants resembling no language I have ever encountered—evenin the blackest chapters of the Livre d’Eibon. When I visited the hill at sunsetI tried to read it aloud, but evoked in response only a vague, sinister rumbling on the farhorizon, and a thin cloud of elemental dust that writhed and whirled like some evil living thing.Perhaps I do not pronounce the alien syllables correctly, or perhaps it is only on the Sabbat—thathellish Sabbat for which the Powers in this house are without question holding me—thatthe great Transfiguration can occur.

Had an odd spell of fright this morning. I thought for a moment that I recalledwhere I had seen that baffling name of Sleght before, and the prospect of realisation filledme with unutterable horror.

April 28Today dark ominous clouds have hovered intermittently over the circle on thehill. I have noticed such clouds several times before, but their contours and arrangements nowhold a fresh significance. They are snake-like and fantastic, and curiously like the evil shadow-shapesI have seen in the house. They float in a circle around the primal cromlech—revolving repeatedlyas though endowed with a sinister life and purpose. I could swear, too, that they give forthan angry murmuring. After some fifteen minutes they sail slowly away, ever to the eastward,like the units of a straggling battalion. Are they indeed those dread Ones whom Solomon knewof old—those giant black beings whose number is legion and whose tread doth shake the earth?

I have been rehearsing the Chant that will transfigure the Nameless Thing,yet strange fears assail me even when I utter the syllables under my breath. Piecing all evidencetogether, I have now discovered that the only way to It is through the locked cellar vault.That vault was built with a hellish purpose, and must cover the hidden burrow leading to theImmemorial Lair. What guardians live endlessly within, flourishing from century to century onan unknown nourishment, only the mad may conjecture. The warlocks of this house, who calledthem out of inner earth, have known them only too well, as the shocking portraits and memoriesof the place reveal.

What troubles me most is the limited nature of the Chant. It evokes the NamelessOne, yet provides no method for the control of That Which is evoked. There are, of course, thegeneral signs and gestures, but whether they will prove effective toward such an One remainsto be seen. Still, the rewards are great enough to justify any danger—and I could not retreatif I would, since an unknown force plainly urges me on.

I have discovered one more obstacle. Since the locked cellar vault must betraversed, the key to that place must be found. The lock is infinitely too strong for forcing.That the key is somewhere hereabouts cannot be doubted, but the time before the Sabbat is veryshort. I must search diligently and thoroughly. It will take courage to unlock that iron door,for what prisoned horrors may not lurk within?

LaterI have been shunning the cellar for the past day or two, but late this afternoonI again descended to those forbidding precincts. At first all was silent, but within five minutesthe menacing padding and muttering began once more beyond the iron door. This time it was loudand more terrifying than on any previous occasion, and I likewise recognised the slitheringthat bespoke some monstrous sea-beast—now swifter and nervously intensified, as if thething were striving to force its way through the portal to where I stood.

As the pacing grew louder, more restless, and more sinister, there began topound through it those hellish and unidentifiable reverberations which I had heard on my secondvisit to the cellar—those muffled reverberations which seemed to echo from far horizonslike distant thunder. Now, however, their volume was magnified an hundredfold, and their timbrefreighted with new and terrifying implications. I can compare the sound to nothing more aptlythan to the roar of some dread monster of the vanished saurian age, when primal horrors roamedthe earth, and Valusia’s serpent-men laid the foundation-stones of evil magic. To sucha roar—but swelled to deafening heights reached by no known organic throat—was thisshocking sound akin. Dare I unlock the door and face the onslaught of what lies beyond?

April 29The key to the vault is found. I came upon it this noon in the little lockedroom—buried beneath rubbish in a drawer of the ancient desk, as if some belated effortto conceal it had been made. It was wrapped in a crumbling newspaper dated Oct. 31, 1872; butthere was an inner wrapping of dried skin—evidently the hide of some unknown reptile—whichbore a Low Latin message in the same crabbed writing as that of the notebooks I found. As Ihad thought, the lock and key were vastly older than the vault. Old Claes van der Heyl had themready for something he or his descendants meant to do—and how much older than he they wereI could not estimate. Deciphering the Latin message, I trembled in a fresh access of clutchingterror and nameless awe.

“The secrets of the monstrous primal Ones,” ran the crabbed text,“whose cryptic words relate the hidden things that were before man; the things no one ofearth should learn, lest peace be forever forfeited; shall by me never suffer revelation. ToYian-Ho, that lost and forbidden city of countless aeons whose place may not be told, I havebeen in the veritable flesh of this body, as none other among the living has been. Therein haveI found, and thence have I borne away, that knowledge which I would gladly lose, though I maynot. I have learnt to bridge a gap that should not be bridged, and must call out of the earthThat Which should not be waked or called. And what is sent to follow me will not sleep tillI or those after me have found and done what is to be found and done.

“That which I have awaked and borne away with me, I may not part withagain. So is it written in the Book of Hidden Things. That which I have willed to be has twinedits dreadful shape around me, and—if I live not to do the bidding—around those childrenborn and unborn who shall come after me, until the bidding be done. Strange may be their joinings,and awful the aid they may summon till the end be reached. Into lands unknown and dim must theseeking go, and a house must be built for the outer Guardians.

“This is the key to that lock which was given me in the dreadful, aeon-old,and forbidden city of Yian-Ho; the lock which I or mine must place upon the vestibule of ThatWhich is to be found. And may the Lords of Yaddith succour me—or him—who must setthat lock in place or turn the key thereof.”

Such was the message—a message which, once I had read it, I seemed tohave known before. Now, as I write these words, the key is before me. I gaze on it with mixeddread and longing, and cannot find words to describe its aspect. It is of the same unknown,subtly greenish frosted metal as the lock; a metal best compared to brass tarnished with verdigris.Its design is alien and fantastic, and the coffin-shaped end of the ponderous bulk leaves nodoubt of the lock it was meant to fit. The handle roughly forms a strange, non-human image,whose exact outlines and identity cannot now be traced. Upon holding it for any length of timeI seem to feel an alien, anomalous life in the cold metal—a quickening or pulsing toofeeble for ordinary recognition. Below the eidolon is graven a faint, aeon-worn legend in thoseblasphemous, Chinese-like hieroglyphs I have come to know so well. I can make out only thebeginning—the words “my vengeance lurks”—before the text fades toindistinctness. There is some fatality in this timely finding of the key—for tomorrownight comes the hellish Sabbat. But strangely enough, amidst all this hideous expectancy,that question of the Sleght name bothers me more and more. Why should I dread to find it linkedwith the van der Heyls?

Walpurgis-Eve—April 30The time has come. I waked last night to see the sky glowing with a lurid greenishradiance—that same morbid green which I have seen in the eyes and skin of certain portraitshere, on the shocking lock and key, on the monstrous menhirs of the hill, and in a thousandother recesses of my consciousness. There were strident whispers in the air—sibilant whistlingslike those of the wind around that dreadful cromlech. Something spoke to me out of the froreaether of space, and it said, “The hour falls.” It is an omen, and I laugh at my ownfears. Have I not the dread words and the Seven Lost Signs of Terror—the power coerciveof any Dweller in the cosmos or in the unknown darkened spaces? I will no longer hesitate.

The heavens are very dark, as if a terrific storm were coming on—a stormeven greater than that of the night when I reached here, nearly a fortnight ago. From the village—lessthan a mile away—I hear a queer and unwonted babbling. It is as I thought—these poordegraded idiots are within the secret, and keep the awful Sabbat on the hill. Here in the housethe shadows gather densely. In the darkness the key before me almost glows with a greenish lightof its own. I have not yet been to the cellar. It is better that I wait, lest the sound of thatmuttering and padding—those slitherings and muffled reverberations—unnerve me beforeI can unlock the fateful door.

Of what I shall encounter, and what I must do, I have only the most generalidea. Shall I find my task in the vault itself, or must I burrow deeper into the nighted heartof our planet? There are things I do not yet understand—or at least, prefer not tounderstand—despite a dreadful, increasing, and inexplicable sense of bygone familiarity withthis fearsome house. That chute, for instance, leading down from the little locked room. But Ithink I know why the wing with the vault extends toward the hill.

6 p.m.Looking out the north windows, I can see a group of villagers on the hill.They seem unaware of the lowering sky, and are digging near the great central menhir. It occursto me that they are working on that stone-rimmed hollow place which looks like a long-chokedtunnel entrance. What is to come? How much of the olden Sabbat rites have these people retained?That key glows horribly—it is not imagination. Dare I use it as it must be used? Anothermatter has greatly disturbed me. Glancing nervously through a book in the library I came uponan ampler form of the name that has teased my memory so sorely: Trintje, wife of Adriaen Sleght.The Adriaen leads me to the very brink of recollection.

MidnightHorror is unleashed, but I must not weaken. The storm has broken with pandaemoniacfury, and lightning has struck the hill three times, yet the hybrid, malformed villagers aregathering within the cromlech. I can see them in the almost constant flashes. The great standingstones loom up shockingly, and have a dull green luminosity that reveals them even when thelightning is not there. The peals of thunder are deafening, and every one seems to be horriblyanswered from some indeterminate direction. As I write, the creatures on the hill havebegun to chant and howl and scream in a degraded, half-simian version of the ancient ritual.Rain pours down like a flood, yet they leap and emit sounds in a kind of diabolic ecstasy.

“Iä! Shub-Niggurath! The Goat with a Thousand Young!”

But the worst thing is within the house. Even at this height, I have begunto hear sounds from the cellar. It is the padding and muttering and slithering and muffledreverberations within the vault.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

Memories come and go. That name of Adriaen Sleght pounds oddly at my consciousness.Dirck van der Heyl’s son-in-law—his child old Dirck’s granddaughter and AbaddonCorey’s great-granddaughter.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

LaterMerciful God! At last I know where I saw that name. I know, and am transfixedwith horror. All is lost.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

The key has begun to feel warm as my left hand nervously clutches it. At timesthat vague quickening or pulsing is so distinct that I can almost feel the living metal move.It came from Yian-Ho for a terrible purpose, and to me—who all too late know the thin streamof van der Heyl blood that trickles down through the Sleghts into my own lineage—has descendedthe hideous task of fulfilling that purpose.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

My courage and curiosity wane. I know the horror that lies beyond that irondoor. What if Claes van der Heyl was my ancestor—need I expiate his nameless sin? Iwill not—I swear I will not!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

[Writing here grows indistinct]

Too late—cannot help self—black paws materialise—am draggedaway toward the cellar.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
