On July 16, 1923, I moved into Exham Priory after the last workman had finished his labours.The restoration had been a stupendous task, for little had remained of the deserted pile buta shell-like ruin; yet because it had been the seat of my ancestors I let no expense deter me.The place had not been inhabited since the reign of James the First, when a tragedy of intenselyhideous, though largely unexplained, nature had struck down the master, five of his children,and several servants; and driven forth under a cloud of suspicion and terror the third son,my lineal progenitor and the only survivor of the abhorred line. With this sole heir denouncedas a murderer, the estate had reverted to the crown, nor had the accused man made any attemptto exculpate himself or regain his property. Shaken by some horror greater than that of conscienceor the law, and expressing only a frantic wish to exclude the ancient edifice from his sightand memory, Walter de la Poer, eleventh Baron Exham, fled to Virginia and there founded thefamily which by the next century had become known as Delapore.

Exham Priory had remained untenanted, though later allotted to the estatesof the Norrys family and much studied because of its peculiarly composite architecture; an architectureinvolving Gothic towers resting on a Saxon or Romanesque substructure, whose foundation in turnwas of a still earlier order or blend of orders—Roman, and even Druidic or native Cymric,if legends speak truly. This foundation was a very singular thing, being merged on one sidewith the solid limestone of the precipice from whose brink the priory overlooked a desolatevalley three miles west of the village of Anchester. Architects and antiquarians loved to examinethis strange relic of forgotten centuries, but the country folk hated it. They had hated ithundreds of years before, when my ancestors lived there, and they hated it now, with the mossand mould of abandonment on it. I had not been a day in Anchester before I knew I came of anaccursed house. And this week workmen have blown up Exham Priory, and are busy obliteratingthe traces of its foundations.

The bare statistics of my ancestry I had always known, together with the factthat my first American forbear had come to the colonies under a strange cloud. Of details, however,I had been kept wholly ignorant through the policy of reticence always maintained by the Delapores.Unlike our planter neighbours, we seldom boasted of crusading ancestors or other mediaeval andRenaissance heroes; nor was any kind of tradition handed down except what may have been recordedin the sealed envelope left before the Civil War by every squire to his eldest son for posthumousopening. The glories we cherished were those achieved since the migration; the glories of aproud and honourable, if somewhat reserved and unsocial Virginia line.

During the war our fortunes were extinguished and our whole existence changedby the burning of Carfax, our home on the banks of the James. My grandfather, advanced in years,had perished in that incendiary outrage, and with him the envelope that bound us all to thepast. I can recall that fire today as I saw it then at the age of seven, with the Federal soldiersshouting, the women screaming, and the negroes howling and praying. My father was in the army,defending Richmond, and after many formalities my mother and I were passed through the linesto join him. When the war ended we all moved north, whence my mother had come; and I grew tomanhood, middle age, and ultimate wealth as a stolid Yankee. Neither my father nor I ever knewwhat our hereditary envelope had contained, and as I merged into the greyness of Massachusettsbusiness life I lost all interest in the mysteries which evidently lurked far back in my familytree. Had I suspected their nature, how gladly I would have left Exham Priory to its moss, bats,and cobwebs!

My father died in 1904, but without any message to leave me, or to my onlychild, Alfred, a motherless boy of ten. It was this boy who reversed the order of family information;for although I could give him only jesting conjectures about the past, he wrote me of some veryinteresting ancestral legends when the late war took him to England in 1917 as an aviation officer.Apparently the Delapores had a colourful and perhaps sinister history, for a friend of my son’s,Capt. Edward Norrys of the Royal Flying Corps, dwelt near the family seat at Anchester and relatedsome peasant superstitions which few novelists could equal for wildness and incredibility. Norryshimself, of course, did not take them seriously; but they amused my son and made good materialfor his letters to me. It was this legendry which definitely turned my attention to my transatlanticheritage, and made me resolve to purchase and restore the family seat which Norrys shewed toAlfred in its picturesque desertion, and offered to get for him at a surprisingly reasonablefigure, since his own uncle was the present owner.

I bought Exham Priory in 1918, but was almost immediately distracted from myplans of restoration by the return of my son as a maimed invalid. During the two years thathe lived I thought of nothing but his care, having even placed my business under the directionof partners. In 1921, as I found myself bereaved and aimless, a retired manufacturer no longeryoung, I resolved to divert my remaining years with my new possession. Visiting Anchester inDecember, I was entertained by Capt. Norrys, a plump, amiable young man who had thought muchof my son, and secured his assistance in gathering plans and anecdotes to guide in the comingrestoration. Exham Priory itself I saw without emotion, a jumble of tottering mediaeval ruinscovered with lichens and honeycombed with rooks’ nests, perched perilously upon a precipice,and denuded of floors or other interior features save the stone walls of the separate towers.

As I gradually recovered the image of the edifice as it had been when my ancestorleft it over three centuries before, I began to hire workmen for the reconstruction. In everycase I was forced to go outside the immediate locality, for the Anchester villagers had an almostunbelievable fear and hatred of the place. This sentiment was so great that it was sometimescommunicated to the outside labourers, causing numerous desertions; whilst its scope appearedto include both the priory and its ancient family.

My son had told me that he was somewhat avoided during his visits because hewas a de la Poer, and I now found myself subtly ostracised for a like reason until I convincedthe peasants how little I knew of my heritage. Even then they sullenly disliked me, so thatI had to collect most of the village traditions through the mediation of Norrys. What the peoplecould not forgive, perhaps, was that I had come to restore a symbol so abhorrent to them; for,rationally or not, they viewed Exham Priory as nothing less than a haunt of fiends and werewolves.

Piecing together the tales which Norrys collected for me, and supplementingthem with the accounts of several savants who had studied the ruins, I deduced that Exham Priorystood on the site of a prehistoric temple; a Druidical or ante-Druidical thing which must havebeen contemporary with Stonehenge. That indescribable rites had been celebrated there, few doubted;and there were unpleasant tales of the transference of these rites into the Cybele-worship whichthe Romans had introduced. Inscriptions still visible in the sub-cellar bore such unmistakableletters as “DIV&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. OPS&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. MAGNA. MAT&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”sign of the Magna Mater whose dark worship was once vainly forbidden to Roman citizens.Anchester had been the camp of the third Augustan legion, as many remains attest, and it wassaid that the temple of Cybele was splendid and thronged with worshippers who performed namelessceremonies at the bidding of a Phrygian priest. Tales added that the fall of the old religiondid not end the orgies at the temple, but that the priests lived on in the new faith withoutreal change. Likewise was it said that the rites did not vanish with the Roman power, and thatcertain among the Saxons added to what remained of the temple, and gave it the essential outlineit subsequently preserved, making it the centre of a cult feared through half the heptarchy.About 1000 A.D. the place is mentioned in a chronicle as being a substantial stone priory housinga strange and powerful monastic order and surrounded by extensive gardens which needed no wallsto exclude a frightened populace. It was never destroyed by the Danes, though after the NormanConquest it must have declined tremendously; since there was no impediment when Henry the Thirdgranted the site to my ancestor, Gilbert de la Poer, First Baron Exham, in 1261.

Of my family before this date there is no evil report, but something strangemust have happened then. In one chronicle there is a reference to a de la Poer as “cursedof God” in 1307, whilst village legendry had nothing but evil and frantic fear to tellof the castle that went up on the foundations of the old temple and priory. The fireside taleswere of the most grisly description, all the ghastlier because of their frightened reticenceand cloudy evasiveness. They represented my ancestors as a race of hereditary daemons besidewhom Gilles de Retz and the Marquis de Sade would seem the veriest tyros, and hinted whisperinglyat their responsibility for the occasional disappearance of villagers through several generations.

The worst characters, apparently, were the barons and their direct heirs; atleast, most was whispered about these. If of healthier inclinations, it was said, an heir wouldearly and mysteriously die to make way for another more typical scion. There seemed to be aninner cult in the family, presided over by the head of the house, and sometimes closed exceptto a few members. Temperament rather than ancestry was evidently the basis of this cult, forit was entered by several who married into the family. Lady Margaret Trevor from Cornwall, wifeof Godfrey, the second son of the fifth baron, became a favourite bane of children all overthe countryside, and the daemon heroine of a particularly horrible old ballad not yet extinctnear the Welsh border. Preserved in balladry, too, though not illustrating the same point, isthe hideous tale of Lady Mary de la Poer, who shortly after her marriage to the Earl of Shrewsfieldwas killed by him and his mother, both of the slayers being absolved and blessed by the priestto whom they confessed what they dared not repeat to the world.

These myths and ballads, typical as they were of crude superstition, repelledme greatly. Their persistence, and their application to so long a line of my ancestors, wereespecially annoying; whilst the imputations of monstrous habits proved unpleasantly reminiscentof the one known scandal of my immediate forbears—the case of my cousin, young RandolphDelapore of Carfax, who went among the negroes and became a voodoo priest after he returnedfrom the Mexican War.

I was much less disturbed by the vaguer tales of wails and howlings in thebarren, windswept valley beneath the limestone cliff; of the graveyard stenches after the springrains; of the floundering, squealing white thing on which Sir John Clave’s horse had trodone night in a lonely field; and of the servant who had gone mad at what he saw in the prioryin the full light of day. These things were hackneyed spectral lore, and I was at that timea pronounced sceptic. The accounts of vanished peasants were less to be dismissed, though notespecially significant in view of mediaeval custom. Prying curiosity meant death, and more thanone severed head had been publicly shewn on the bastions—now effaced—around ExhamPriory.

A few of the tales were exceedingly picturesque, and made me wish I had learntmore of comparative mythology in my youth. There was, for instance, the belief that a legionof bat-winged devils kept Witches’ Sabbath each night at the priory—a legion whosesustenance might explain the disproportionate abundance of coarse vegetables harvested in thevast gardens. And, most vivid of all, there was the dramatic epic of the rats—the scamperingarmy of obscene vermin which had burst forth from the castle three months after the tragedythat doomed it to desertion—the lean, filthy, ravenous army which had swept all beforeit and devoured fowl, cats, dogs, hogs, sheep, and even two hapless human beings before itsfury was spent. Around that unforgettable rodent army a whole separate cycle of myths revolves,for it scattered among the village homes and brought curses and horrors in its train.

Such was the lore that assailed me as I pushed to completion, with an elderlyobstinacy, the work of restoring my ancestral home. It must not be imagined for a moment thatthese tales formed my principal psychological environment. On the other hand, I was constantlypraised and encouraged by Capt. Norrys and the antiquarians who surrounded and aided me. Whenthe task was done, over two years after its commencement, I viewed the great rooms, wainscottedwalls, vaulted ceilings, mullioned windows, and broad staircases with a pride which fully compensatedfor the prodigious expense of the restoration. Every attribute of the Middle Ages was cunninglyreproduced, and the new parts blended perfectly with the original walls and foundations. Theseat of my fathers was complete, and I looked forward to redeeming at last the local fame ofthe line which ended in me. I would reside here permanently, and prove that a de la Poer (forI had adopted again the original spelling of the name) need not be a fiend. My comfort was perhapsaugmented by the fact that, although Exham Priory was mediaevally fitted, its interior was intruth wholly new and free from old vermin and old ghosts alike.

As I have said, I moved in on July 16, 1923. My household consisted of sevenservants and nine cats, of which latter species I am particularly fond. My eldest cat, “Nigger-Man”,was seven years old and had come with me from my home in Bolton, Massachusetts; the others Ihad accumulated whilst living with Capt. Norrys’ family during the restoration of thepriory. For five days our routine proceeded with the utmost placidity, my time being spent mostlyin the codification of old family data. I had now obtained some very circumstantial accountsof the final tragedy and flight of Walter de la Poer, which I conceived to be the probable contentsof the hereditary paper lost in the fire at Carfax. It appeared that my ancestor was accusedwith much reason of having killed all the other members of his household, except four servantconfederates, in their sleep, about two weeks after a shocking discovery which changed his wholedemeanour, but which, except by implication, he disclosed to no one save perhaps the servantswho assisted him and afterward fled beyond reach.

This deliberate slaughter, which included a father, three brothers, and twosisters, was largely condoned by the villagers, and so slackly treated by the law that its perpetratorescaped honoured, unharmed, and undisguised to Virginia; the general whispered sentiment beingthat he had purged the land of an immemorial curse. What discovery had prompted an act so terrible,I could scarcely even conjecture. Walter de la Poer must have known for years the sinister talesabout his family, so that this material could have given him no fresh impulse. Had he, then,witnessed some appalling ancient rite, or stumbled upon some frightful and revealing symbolin the priory or its vicinity? He was reputed to have been a shy, gentle youth in England. InVirginia he seemed not so much hard or bitter as harassed and apprehensive. He was spoken ofin the diary of another gentleman-adventurer, Francis Harley of Bellview, as a man of unexampledjustice, honour, and delicacy.

On July 22 occurred the first incident which, though lightly dismissed at thetime, takes on a preternatural significance in relation to later events. It was so simple asto be almost negligible, and could not possibly have been noticed under the circumstances; forit must be recalled that since I was in a building practically fresh and new except for thewalls, and surrounded by a well-balanced staff of servitors, apprehension would have been absurddespite the locality. What I afterward remembered is merely this—that my old black cat,whose moods I know so well, was undoubtedly alert and anxious to an extent wholly out of keepingwith his natural character. He roved from room to room, restless and disturbed, and sniffedconstantly about the walls which formed part of the old Gothic structure. I realise how tritethis sounds—like the inevitable dog in the ghost story, which always growls before hismaster sees the sheeted figure—yet I cannot consistently suppress it.

The following day a servant complained of restlessness among all the cats inthe house. He came to me in my study, a lofty west room on the second story, with groined arches,black oak panelling, and a triple Gothic window overlooking the limestone cliff and desolatevalley; and even as he spoke I saw the jetty form of Nigger-Man creeping along the west walland scratching at the new panels which overlaid the ancient stone. I told the man that theremust be some singular odour or emanation from the old stonework, imperceptible to human senses,but affecting the delicate organs of cats even through the new woodwork. This I truly believed,and when the fellow suggested the presence of mice or rats, I mentioned that there had beenno rats there for three hundred years, and that even the field mice of the surrounding countrycould hardly be found in these high walls, where they had never been known to stray. That afternoonI called on Capt. Norrys, and he assured me that it would be quite incredible for field miceto infest the priory in such a sudden and unprecedented fashion.

That night, dispensing as usual with a valet, I retired in the west tower chamberwhich I had chosen as my own, reached from the study by a stone staircase and short gallery—theformer partly ancient, the latter entirely restored. This room was circular, very high, andwithout wainscotting, being hung with arras which I had myself chosen in London. Seeing thatNigger-Man was with me, I shut the heavy Gothic door and retired by the light of the electricbulbs which so cleverly counterfeited candles, finally switching off the light and sinking onthe carved and canopied four-poster, with the venerable cat in his accustomed place across myfeet. I did not draw the curtains, but gazed out at the narrow north window which I faced. Therewas a suspicion of aurora in the sky, and the delicate traceries of the window were pleasantlysilhouetted.

At some time I must have fallen quietly asleep, for I recall a distinct senseof leaving strange dreams, when the cat started violently from his placid position. I saw himin the faint auroral glow, head strained forward, fore feet on my ankles, and hind feet stretchedbehind. He was looking intensely at a point on the wall somewhat west of the window, a pointwhich to my eye had nothing to mark it, but toward which all my attention was now directed.And as I watched, I knew that Nigger-Man was not vainly excited. Whether the arras actuallymoved I cannot say. I think it did, very slightly. But what I can swear to is that behind itI heard a low, distinct scurrying as of rats or mice. In a moment the cat had jumped bodilyon the screening tapestry, bringing the affected section to the floor with his weight, and exposinga damp, ancient wall of stone; patched here and there by the restorers, and devoid of any traceof rodent prowlers. Nigger-Man raced up and down the floor by this part of the wall, clawingthe fallen arras and seemingly trying at times to insert a paw between the wall and the oakenfloor. He found nothing, and after a time returned wearily to his place across my feet. I hadnot moved, but I did not sleep again that night.

In the morning I questioned all the servants, and found that none of them hadnoticed anything unusual, save that the cook remembered the actions of a cat which had restedon her windowsill. This cat had howled at some unknown hour of the night, awaking the cook intime for her to see him dart purposefully out of the open door down the stairs. I drowsed awaythe noontime, and in the afternoon called again on Capt. Norrys, who became exceedingly interestedin what I told him. The odd incidents—so slight yet so curious—appealed to his senseof the picturesque, and elicited from him a number of reminiscences of local ghostly lore. Wewere genuinely perplexed at the presence of rats, and Norrys lent me some traps and Paris green,which I had the servants place in strategic localities when I returned.

I retired early, being very sleepy, but was harassed by dreams of the mosthorrible sort. I seemed to be looking down from an immense height upon a twilit grotto, knee-deepwith filth, where a white-bearded daemon swineherd drove about with his staff a flock of fungous,flabby beasts whose appearance filled me with unutterable loathing. Then, as the swineherd pausedand nodded over his task, a mighty swarm of rats rained down on the stinking abyss and fellto devouring beasts and man alike.

From this terrific vision I was abruptly awaked by the motions of Nigger-Man,who had been sleeping as usual across my feet. This time I did not have to question the sourceof his snarls and hisses, and of the fear which made him sink his claws into my ankle, unconsciousof their effect; for on every side of the chamber the walls were alive with nauseous sound—theverminous slithering of ravenous, gigantic rats. There was now no aurora to shew the state ofthe arras—the fallen section of which had been replaced—but I was not too frightenedto switch on the light.

As the bulbs leapt into radiance I saw a hideous shaking all over the tapestry,causing the somewhat peculiar designs to execute a singular dance of death. This motion disappearedalmost at once, and the sound with it. Springing out of bed, I poked at the arras with the longhandle of a warming-pan that rested near, and lifted one section to see what lay beneath. Therewas nothing but the patched stone wall, and even the cat had lost his tense realisation of abnormalpresences. When I examined the circular trap that had been placed in the room, I found all ofthe openings sprung, though no trace remained of what had been caught and had escaped.

Further sleep was out of the question, so, lighting a candle, I opened thedoor and went out in the gallery toward the stairs to my study, Nigger-Man following at my heels.Before we had reached the stone steps, however, the cat darted ahead of me and vanished downthe ancient flight. As I descended the stairs myself, I became suddenly aware of sounds in thegreat room below; sounds of a nature which could not be mistaken. The oak-panelled walls werealive with rats, scampering and milling, whilst Nigger-Man was racing about with the fury ofa baffled hunter. Reaching the bottom, I switched on the light, which did not this time causethe noise to subside. The rats continued their riot, stampeding with such force and distinctnessthat I could finally assign to their motions a definite direction. These creatures, in numbersapparently inexhaustible, were engaged in one stupendous migration from inconceivable heightsto some depth conceivably, or inconceivably, below.

I now heard steps in the corridor, and in another moment two servants pushedopen the massive door. They were searching the house for some unknown source of disturbancewhich had thrown all the cats into a snarling panic and caused them to plunge precipitatelydown several flights of stairs and squat, yowling, before the closed door to the sub-cellar.I asked them if they had heard the rats, but they replied in the negative. And when I turnedto call their attention to the sounds in the panels, I realised that the noise had ceased. Withthe two men, I went down to the door of the sub-cellar, but found the cats already dispersed.Later I resolved to explore the crypt below, but for the present I merely made a round of thetraps. All were sprung, yet all were tenantless. Satisfying myself that no one had heard therats save the felines and me, I sat in my study till morning; thinking profoundly, and recallingevery scrap of legend I had unearthed concerning the building I inhabited.

I slept some in the forenoon, leaning back in the one comfortable library chairwhich my mediaeval plan of furnishing could not banish. Later I telephoned to Capt. Norrys,who came over and helped me explore the sub-cellar. Absolutely nothing untoward was found, althoughwe could not repress a thrill at the knowledge that this vault was built by Roman hands. Everylow arch and massive pillar was Roman—not the debased Romanesque of the bungling Saxons,but the severe and harmonious classicism of the age of the Caesars; indeed, the walls aboundedwith inscriptions familiar to the antiquarians who had repeatedly explored the place—thingslike “P.GETAE. PROP&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. TEMP&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. DONA&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”and “L. PRAEC&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. VS&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. PONTIFI&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.ATYS&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”

The reference to Atys made me shiver, for I had read Catullus and knew somethingof the hideous rites of the Eastern god, whose worship was so mixed with that of Cybele. Norrysand I, by the light of lanterns, tried to interpret the odd and nearly effaced designs on certainirregularly rectangular blocks of stone generally held to be altars, but could make nothingof them. We remembered that one pattern, a sort of rayed sun, was held by students to implya non-Roman origin, suggesting that these altars had merely been adopted by the Roman priestsfrom some older and perhaps aboriginal temple on the same site. On one of these blocks weresome brown stains which made me wonder. The largest, in the centre of the room, had certainfeatures on the upper surface which indicated its connexion with fire—probably burnt offerings.

Such were the sights in that crypt before whose door the cats had howled, andwhere Norrys and I now determined to pass the night. Couches were brought down by the servants,who were told not to mind any nocturnal actions of the cats, and Nigger-Man was admitted asmuch for help as for companionship. We decided to keep the great oak door—a modern replicawith slits for ventilation—tightly closed; and, with this attended to, we retired withlanterns still burning to await whatever might occur.

The vault was very deep in the foundations of the priory, and undoubtedly fardown on the face of the beetling limestone cliff overlooking the waste valley. That it had beenthe goal of the scuffling and unexplainable rats I could not doubt, though why, I could nottell. As we lay there expectantly, I found my vigil occasionally mixed with half-formed dreamsfrom which the uneasy motions of the cat across my feet would rouse me. These dreams were notwholesome, but horribly like the one I had had the night before. I saw again the twilit grotto,and the swineherd with his unmentionable fungous beasts wallowing in filth, and as I lookedat these things they seemed nearer and more distinct—so distinct that I could almost observetheir features. Then I did observe the flabby features of one of them—and awaked withsuch a scream that Nigger-Man started up, whilst Capt. Norrys, who had not slept, laughed considerably.Norrys might have laughed more—or perhaps less—had he known what it was that mademe scream. But I did not remember myself till later. Ultimate horror often paralyses memoryin a merciful way.

Norrys waked me when the phenomena began. Out of the same frightful dream Iwas called by his gentle shaking and his urging to listen to the cats. Indeed, there was muchto listen to, for beyond the closed door at the head of the stone steps was a veritable nightmareof feline yelling and clawing, whilst Nigger-Man, unmindful of his kindred outside, was runningexcitedly around the bare stone walls, in which I heard the same babel of scurrying rats thathad troubled me the night before.

An acute terror now rose within me, for here were anomalies which nothing normalcould well explain. These rats, if not the creatures of a madness which I shared with the catsalone, must be burrowing and sliding in Roman walls I had thought to be of solid limestone blocks&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.unless perhaps the action of water through more than seventeen centuries had eaten winding tunnelswhich rodent bodies had worn clear and ample.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But even so, the spectralhorror was no less; for if these were living vermin why did not Norrys hear their disgustingcommotion? Why did he urge me to watch Nigger-Man and listen to the cats outside, and why didhe guess wildly and vaguely at what could have aroused them?

By the time I had managed to tell him, as rationally as I could, what I thoughtI was hearing, my ears gave me the last fading impression of the scurrying; which had retreatedstill downward, far underneath this deepest of sub-cellars till it seemed as if the wholecliff below were riddled with questing rats. Norrys was not as sceptical as I had anticipated,but instead seemed profoundly moved. He motioned to me to notice that the cats at the door hadceased their clamour, as if giving up the rats for lost; whilst Nigger-Man had a burst of renewedrestlessness, and was clawing frantically around the bottom of the large stone altar in thecentre of the room, which was nearer Norrys’ couch than mine.

My fear of the unknown was at this point very great. Something astounding hadoccurred, and I saw that Capt. Norrys, a younger, stouter, and presumably more naturally materialisticman, was affected fully as much as myself—perhaps because of his lifelong and intimatefamiliarity with local legend. We could for the moment do nothing but watch the old black catas he pawed with decreasing fervour at the base of the altar, occasionally looking up and mewingto me in that persuasive manner which he used when he wished me to perform some favour for him.

Norrys now took a lantern close to the altar and examined the place where Nigger-Manwas pawing; silently kneeling and scraping away the lichens of centuries which joined the massivepre-Roman block to the tessellated floor. He did not find anything, and was about to abandonhis effort when I noticed a trivial circumstance which made me shudder, even though it impliednothing more than I had already imagined. I told him of it, and we both looked at its almostimperceptible manifestation with the fixedness of fascinated discovery and acknowledgment. Itwas only this—that the flame of the lantern set down near the altar was slightly but certainlyflickering from a draught of air which it had not before received, and which came indubitablyfrom the crevice between floor and altar where Norrys was scraping away the lichens.

We spent the rest of the night in the brilliantly lighted study, nervouslydiscussing what we should do next. The discovery that some vault deeper than the deepest knownmasonry of the Romans underlay this accursed pile—some vault unsuspected by the curiousantiquarians of three centuries—would have been sufficient to excite us without any backgroundof the sinister. As it was, the fascination became twofold; and we paused in doubt whether toabandon our search and quit the priory forever in superstitious caution, or to gratify our senseof adventure and brave whatever horrors might await us in the unknown depths. By morning wehad compromised, and decided to go to London to gather a group of archaeologists and scientificmen fit to cope with the mystery. It should be mentioned that before leaving the sub-cellarwe had vainly tried to move the central altar which we now recognised as the gate to a new pitof nameless fear. What secret would open the gate, wiser men than we would have to find.

During many days in London Capt. Norrys and I presented our facts, conjectures,and legendary anecdotes to five eminent authorities, all men who could be trusted to respectany family disclosures which future explorations might develop. We found most of them littledisposed to scoff, but instead intensely interested and sincerely sympathetic. It is hardlynecessary to name them all, but I may say that they included Sir William Brinton, whose excavationsin the Troad excited most of the world in their day. As we all took the train for AnchesterI felt myself poised on the brink of frightful revelations, a sensation symbolised by the airof mourning among the many Americans at the unexpected death of the President on the other sideof the world.

On the evening of August 7th we reached Exham Priory, where the servants assuredme that nothing unusual had occurred. The cats, even old Nigger-Man, had been perfectly placid;and not a trap in the house had been sprung. We were to begin exploring on the following day,awaiting which I assigned well-appointed rooms to all my guests. I myself retired in my owntower chamber, with Nigger-Man across my feet. Sleep came quickly, but hideous dreams assailedme. There was a vision of a Roman feast like that of Trimalchio, with a horror in a coveredplatter. Then came that damnable, recurrent thing about the swineherd and his filthy drove inthe twilit grotto. Yet when I awoke it was full daylight, with normal sounds in the house below.The rats, living or spectral, had not troubled me; and Nigger-Man was quietly asleep.On going down, I found that the same tranquillity had prevailed elsewhere; a condition whichone of the assembled savants—a fellow named Thornton, devoted to the psychic—ratherabsurdly laid to the fact that I had now been shewn the thing which certain forces had wishedto shew me.

All was now ready, and at 11 a.m. our entire group of seven men, bearing powerfulelectric searchlights and implements of excavation, went down to the sub-cellar and bolted thedoor behind us. Nigger-Man was with us, for the investigators found no occasion to despise hisexcitability, and were indeed anxious that he be present in case of obscure rodent manifestations.We noted the Roman inscriptions and unknown altar designs only briefly, for three of the savantshad already seen them, and all knew their characteristics. Prime attention was paid to the momentouscentral altar, and within an hour Sir William Brinton had caused it to tilt backward, balancedby some unknown species of counterweight.

There now lay revealed such a horror as would have overwhelmed us had we notbeen prepared. Through a nearly square opening in the tiled floor, sprawling on a flight ofstone steps so prodigiously worn that it was little more than an inclined plane at the centre,was a ghastly array of human or semi-human bones. Those which retained their collocation asskeletons shewed attitudes of panic fear, and over all were the marks of rodent gnawing. Theskulls denoted nothing short of utter idiocy, cretinism, or primitive semi-apedom. Above thehellishly littered steps arched a descending passage seemingly chiselled from the solid rock,and conducting a current of air. This current was not a sudden and noxious rush as from a closedvault, but a cool breeze with something of freshness in it. We did not pause long, but shiveringlybegan to clear a passage down the steps. It was then that Sir William, examining the hewn walls,made the odd observation that the passage, according to the direction of the strokes, must havebeen chiselled from beneath.

I must be very deliberate now, and choose my words.

After ploughing down a few steps amidst the gnawed bones we saw that therewas light ahead; not any mystic phosphorescence, but a filtered daylight which could not comeexcept from unknown fissures in the cliff that overlooked the waste valley. That such fissureshad escaped notice from outside was hardly remarkable, for not only is the valley wholly uninhabited,but the cliff is so high and beetling that only an aëronaut could study its face in detail.A few steps more, and our breaths were literally snatched from us by what we saw; so literallythat Thornton, the psychic investigator, actually fainted in the arms of the dazed man who stoodbehind him. Norrys, his plump face utterly white and flabby, simply cried out inarticulately;whilst I think that what I did was to gasp or hiss, and cover my eyes. The man behind me—theonly one of the party older than I—croaked the hackneyed “My God!” in themost cracked voice I ever heard. Of seven cultivated men, only Sir William Brinton retainedhis composure; a thing more to his credit because he led the party and must have seen the sightfirst.

It was a twilit grotto of enormous height, stretching away farther than anyeye could see; a subterraneous world of limitless mystery and horrible suggestion. There werebuildings and other architectural remains—in one terrified glance I saw a weird patternof tumuli, a savage circle of monoliths, a low-domed Roman ruin, a sprawling Saxon pile, andan early English edifice of wood—but all these were dwarfed by the ghoulish spectaclepresented by the general surface of the ground. For yards about the steps extended an insanetangle of human bones, or bones at least as human as those on the steps. Like a foamy sea theystretched, some fallen apart, but others wholly or partly articulated as skeletons; these latterinvariably in postures of daemoniac frenzy, either fighting off some menace or clutching otherforms with cannibal intent.

When Dr. Trask, the anthropologist, stooped to classify the skulls, he founda degraded mixture which utterly baffled him. They were mostly lower than the Piltdown man inthe scale of evolution, but in every case definitely human. Many were of higher grade, and avery few were the skulls of supremely and sensitively developed types. All the bones were gnawed,mostly by rats, but somewhat by others of the half-human drove. Mixed with them were many tinybones of rats—fallen members of the lethal army which closed the ancient epic.

I wonder that any man among us lived and kept his sanity through that hideousday of discovery. Not Hoffmann or Huysmans could conceive a scene more wildly incredible, morefrenetically repellent, or more Gothically grotesque than the twilit grotto through which weseven staggered; each stumbling on revelation after revelation, and trying to keep for the noncefrom thinking of the events which must have taken place there three hundred years, or a thousand,or two thousand, or ten thousand years ago. It was the antechamber of hell, and poor Thorntonfainted again when Trask told him that some of the skeleton things must have descended as quadrupedsthrough the last twenty or more generations.

Horror piled on horror as we began to interpret the architectural remains.The quadruped things—with their occasional recruits from the biped class—had beenkept in stone pens, out of which they must have broken in their last delirium of hunger or rat-fear.There had been great herds of them, evidently fattened on the coarse vegetables whose remainscould be found as a sort of poisonous ensilage at the bottom of huge stone bins older than Rome.I knew now why my ancestors had had such excessive gardens—would to heaven I could forget!The purpose of the herds I did not have to ask.

Sir William, standing with his searchlight in the Roman ruin, translated aloudthe most shocking ritual I have ever known; and told of the diet of the antediluvian cult whichthe priests of Cybele found and mingled with their own. Norrys, used as he was to the trenches,could not walk straight when he came out of the English building. It was a butcher shop andkitchen—he had expected that—but it was too much to see familiar English implementsin such a place, and to read familiar English graffiti there, some as recent as 1610.I could not go in that building—that building whose daemon activities were stopped onlyby the dagger of my ancestor Walter de la Poer.

What I did venture to enter was the low Saxon building, whose oaken door hadfallen, and there I found a terrible row of ten stone cells with rusty bars. Three had tenants,all skeletons of high grade, and on the bony forefinger of one I found a seal ring with my owncoat-of-arms. Sir William found a vault with far older cells below the Roman chapel, but thesecells were empty. Below them was a low crypt with cases of formally arranged bones, some ofthem bearing terrible parallel inscriptions carved in Latin, Greek, and the tongue of Phrygia.Meanwhile, Dr. Trask had opened one of the prehistoric tumuli, and brought to light skulls whichwere slightly more human than a gorilla’s, and which bore indescribable ideographic carvings.Through all this horror my cat stalked unperturbed. Once I saw him monstrously perched atopa mountain of bones, and wondered at the secrets that might lie behind his yellow eyes.

Having grasped to some slight degree the frightful revelations of this twilitarea—an area so hideously foreshadowed by my recurrent dream—we turned to that apparentlyboundless depth of midnight cavern where no ray of light from the cliff could penetrate. Weshall never know what sightless Stygian worlds yawn beyond the little distance we went, forit was decided that such secrets are not good for mankind. But there was plenty to engross usclose at hand, for we had not gone far before the searchlights shewed that accursed infinityof pits in which the rats had feasted, and whose sudden lack of replenishment had driven theravenous rodent army first to turn on the living herds of starving things, and then to burstforth from the priory in that historic orgy of devastation which the peasants will never forget.

God! those carrion black pits of sawed, picked bones and opened skulls! Thosenightmare chasms choked with the pithecanthropoid, Celtic, Roman, and English bones of countlessunhallowed centuries! Some of them were full, and none can say how deep they had once been.Others were still bottomless to our searchlights, and peopled by unnamable fancies. What, Ithought, of the hapless rats that stumbled into such traps amidst the blackness of their questsin this grisly Tartarus?

Once my foot slipped near a horribly yawning brink, and I had a moment of ecstaticfear. I must have been musing a long time, for I could not see any of the party but the plumpCapt. Norrys. Then there came a sound from that inky, boundless, farther distance that I thoughtI knew; and I saw my old black cat dart past me like a winged Egyptian god, straight into theillimitable gulf of the unknown. But I was not far behind, for there was no doubt after anothersecond. It was the eldritch scurrying of those fiend-born rats, always questing for new horrors,and determined to lead me on even unto those grinning caverns of earth’s centre whereNyarlathotep, the mad faceless god, howls blindly to the piping of two amorphous idiotflute-players.

My searchlight expired, but still I ran. I heard voices, and yowls, and echoes,but above all there gently rose that impious, insidious scurrying; gently rising, rising, asa stiff bloated corpse gently rises above an oily river that flows under endless onyx bridgesto a black, putrid sea. Something bumped into me—something soft and plump. It must havebeen the rats; the viscous, gelatinous, ravenous army that feast on the dead and the living.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Why shouldn’t rats eat a de la Poer as a de la Poer eats forbidden things?&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.The war ate my boy, damn them all&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and the Yanks ate Carfax with flamesand burnt Grandsire Delapore and the secret&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. No, no, I tell you, I am not that daemon swineherd in the twilit grotto! It was not Edward Norrys’ fatface on that flabby, fungous thing! Who says I am a de la Poer? He lived, but my boy died!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.Shall a Norrys hold the lands of a de la Poer?&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s voodoo, I tell you&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.that spotted snake&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Curse you, Thornton, I’ll teach you to faint atwhat my family do!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ’Sblood, thou stinkard, I’ll learn ye how togust&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. wolde ye swynke me thilke wys?&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Magna Mater! MagnaMater!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Atys&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Dia ad aghaidh ’s ad aodann&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.agus bas dunach ort! Dhonas ’s dholas ort, agus leat-sa!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Ungl&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.ungl&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. rrrlh&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. chchch&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

That is what they say I said when they found me in the blackness after threehours; found me crouching in the blackness over the plump, half-eaten body of Capt. Norrys,with my own cat leaping and tearing at my throat. Now they have blown up Exham Priory, takenmy Nigger-Man away from me, and shut me into this barred room at Hanwell with fearful whispersabout my heredity and experiences. Thornton is in the next room, but they prevent me from talkingto him. They are trying, too, to suppress most of the facts concerning the priory. When I speakof poor Norrys they accuse me of a hideous thing, but they must know that I did not do it. Theymust know it was the rats; the slithering, scurrying rats whose scampering will never let mesleep; the daemon rats that race behind the padding in this room and beckon me down to greaterhorrors than I have ever known; the rats they can never hear; the rats, the rats in the walls.
